<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 39</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter XXXIX: Gothic Kingdom Of Italy.</h2>
			<pre xml:space="preserve">Zeno And Anastasius, Emperors Of The East.—Birth, Education, And First Exploits Of Theodoric The Ostrogoth.— His Invasion And Conquest Of Italy.—The Gothic Kingdom Of Italy.—State Of The West.—Military And Civil Government.— The Senator Boethius.—Last Acts And Death Of Theodoric.</pre>
			<p>After the fall of the Roman empire in the West, an interval of fifty years, till the memorable reign of Justinian, is faintly marked by the obscure names and imperfect annals of Zeno, Anastasius, and Justin, who successively ascended to the throne of Constantinople. During the same period, Italy revived and flourished under the government of a Gothic king, who might have deserved a statue among the best and bravest of the ancient Romans.</p>
			<p>Theodoric the Ostrogoth, the fourteenth in lineal descent of the royal line of the Amali, <a href="#Dlinknote-1" id="Dlinknoteref-1" name="Dlinknoteref-1">1</a> was born in the neighborhood of Vienna <a href="#Dlinknote-2" id="Dlinknoteref-2" name="Dlinknoteref-2">2</a> two years after the death of Attila. <a href="#Dlinknote-2111" id="Dlinknoteref-2111" name="Dlinknoteref-2111">2111</a> A recent victory had restored the independence of the Ostrogoths; and the three brothers, Walamir, Theodemir, and Widimir, who ruled that warlike nation with united counsels, had separately pitched their habitations in the fertile though desolate province of Pannonia. The Huns still threatened their revolted subjects, but their hasty attack was repelled by the single forces of Walamir, and the news of his victory reached the distant camp of his brother in the same auspicious moment that the favorite concubine of Theodemir was delivered of a son and heir. In the eighth year of his age, Theodoric was reluctantly yielded by his father to the public interest, as the pledge of an alliance which Leo, emperor of the East, had consented to purchase by an annual subsidy of three hundred pounds of gold. The royal hostage was educated at Constantinople with care and tenderness. His body was formed to all the exercises of war, his mind was expanded by the habits of liberal conversation; he frequented the schools of the most skilful masters; but he disdained or neglected the arts of Greece, and so ignorant did he always remain of the first elements of science, that a rude mark was contrived to represent the signature of the illiterate king of Italy. <a href="#Dlinknote-3" id="Dlinknoteref-3" name="Dlinknoteref-3">3</a> As soon as he had attained the age of eighteen, he was restored to the wishes of the Ostrogoths, whom the emperor aspired to gain by liberality and confidence. Walamir had fallen in battle; the youngest of the brothers, Widimir, had led away into Italy and Gaul an army of Barbarians, and the whole nation acknowledged for their king the father of Theodoric. His ferocious subjects admired the strength and stature of their young prince; <a href="#Dlinknote-4" id="Dlinknoteref-4" name="Dlinknoteref-4">4</a> and he soon convinced them that he had not degenerated from the valor of his ancestors. At the head of six thousand volunteers, he secretly left the camp in quest of adventures, descended the Danube as far as Singidunum, or Belgrade, and soon returned to his father with the spoils of a Sarmatian king whom he had vanquished and slain. Such triumphs, however, were productive only of fame, and the invincible Ostrogoths were reduced to extreme distress by the want of clothing and food. They unanimously resolved to desert their Pannonian encampments, and boldly to advance into the warm and wealthy neighborhood of the Byzantine court, which already maintained in pride and luxury so many bands of confederate Goths. After proving, by some acts of hostility, that they could be dangerous, or at least troublesome, enemies, the Ostrogoths sold at a high price their reconciliation and fidelity, accepted a donative of lands and money, and were intrusted with the defence of the Lower Danube, under the command of Theodoric, who succeeded after his father's death to the hereditary throne of the Amali. <a href="#Dlinknote-5" id="Dlinknoteref-5" name="Dlinknoteref-5">5</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-1" name="Dlinknote-1">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">1 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-1">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Jornandes (de Rebus Geticis, c. 13, 14, p. 629, 630, edit. Grot.) has drawn the pedigree of Theodoric from Gapt, one of the Anses or Demigods, who lived about the time of Domitian. Cassiodorus, the first who celebrates the royal race of the Amali, (Viriar. viii. 5, ix. 25, x. 2, xi. 1,) reckons the grandson of Theodoric as the xviith in descent. Peringsciold (the Swedish commentator of Cochloeus, Vit. Theodoric. p. 271, &amp;c., Stockholm, 1699) labors to connect this genealogy with the legends or traditions of his native country. * Note: Amala was a name of hereditary sanctity and honor among the Visigoths. It enters into the names of Amalaberga, Amala suintha, (swinther means strength,) Amalafred, Amalarich. In the poem of the Nibelungen written three hundred years later, the Ostrogoths are called the Amilungen. According to Wachter it means, unstained, from the privative a, and malo a stain. It is pure Sanscrit, Amala, immaculatus. Schlegel. Indische Bibliothek, 1. p. 233.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-2" name="Dlinknote-2">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">2 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-2">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ More correctly on the banks of the Lake Pelso, (Nieusiedler-see,) near Carnuntum, almost on the same spot where Marcus Antoninus composed his meditations, Jornandes, c. 52, p. 659. Severin. Pannonia Illustrata, p. 22. Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq. (tom. i. p. 350.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-2111" name="Dlinknote-2111">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">2111 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-2111">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The date of Theodoric's birth is not accurately determined. We can hardly err, observes Manso, in placing it between the years 453 and 455, Manso, Geschichte des Ost Gothischen Reichs, p. 14.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-3" name="Dlinknote-3">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">3 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-3">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The four first letters of his name were inscribed on a gold plate, and when it was fixed on the paper, the king drew his pen through the intervals (Anonym. Valesian. ad calcem Amm. Marcellin p. 722.) This authentic fact, with the testimony of Procopius, or at least of the contemporary Goths, (Gothic. 1. i. c. 2, p. 311,) far outweighs the vague praises of Ennodius (Sirmond Opera, tom. i. p. 1596) and Theophanes, (Chronograph. p. 112.) * Note: Le Beau and his Commentator, M. St. Martin, support, though with no very satisfactory evidence, the opposite opinion. But Lord Mahon (Life of Belisarius, p. 19) urges the much stronger argument, the Byzantine education of Theodroic.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-4" name="Dlinknote-4">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">4 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-4">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Statura est quae resignet proceritate regnantem, (Ennodius, p. 1614.) The bishop of Pavia (I mean the ecclesiastic who wished to be a bishop) then proceeds to celebrate the complexion, eyes, hands, &amp;c, of his sovereign.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-5" name="Dlinknote-5">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">5 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-5">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The state of the Ostrogoths, and the first years of Theodoric, are found in Jornandes, (c. 52—56, p. 689—696) and Malchus, (Excerpt. Legat. p. 78—80,) who erroneously styles him the son of Walamir.]</p>
			<p>A hero, descended from a race of kings, must have despised the base Isaurian who was invested with the Roman purple, without any endowment of mind or body, without any advantages of royal birth, or superior qualifications. After the failure of the Theodosian life, the choice of Pulcheria and of the senate might be justified in some measure by the characters of Martin and Leo, but the latter of these princes confirmed and dishonored his reign by the perfidious murder of Aspar and his sons, who too rigorously exacted the debt of gratitude and obedience. The inheritance of Leo and of the East was peaceably devolved on his infant grandson, the son of his daughter Ariadne; and her Isaurian husband, the fortunate Trascalisseus, exchanged that barbarous sound for the Grecian appellation of Zeno. After the decease of the elder Leo, he approached with unnatural respect the throne of his son, humbly received, as a gift, the second rank in the empire, and soon excited the public suspicion on the sudden and premature death of his young colleague, whose life could no longer promote the success of his ambition. But the palace of Constantinople was ruled by female influence, and agitated by female passions: and Verina, the widow of Leo, claiming his empire as her own, pronounced a sentence of deposition against the worthless and ungrateful servant on whom she alone had bestowed the sceptre of the East. <a href="#Dlinknote-6" id="Dlinknoteref-6" name="Dlinknoteref-6">6</a> As soon as she sounded a revolt in the ears of Zeno, he fled with precipitation into the mountains of Isauria, and her brother Basiliscus, already infamous by his African expedition, <a href="#Dlinknote-7" id="Dlinknoteref-7" name="Dlinknoteref-7">7</a> was unanimously proclaimed by the servile senate. But the reign of the usurper was short and turbulent. Basiliscus presumed to assassinate the lover of his sister; he dared to offend the lover of his wife, the vain and insolent Harmatius, who, in the midst of Asiatic luxury, affected the dress, the demeanor, and the surname of Achilles. <a href="#Dlinknote-8" id="Dlinknoteref-8" name="Dlinknoteref-8">8</a> By the conspiracy of the malcontents, Zeno was recalled from exile; the armies, the capital, the person, of Basiliscus, were betrayed; and his whole family was condemned to the long agony of cold and hunger by the inhuman conqueror, who wanted courage to encounter or to forgive his enemies. <a href="#Dlinknote-811" id="Dlinknoteref-811" name="Dlinknoteref-811">811</a> The haughty spirit of Verina was still incapable of submission or repose. She provoked the enmity of a favorite general, embraced his cause as soon as he was disgraced, created a new emperor in Syria and Egypt, <a href="#Dlinknote-812" id="Dlinknoteref-812" name="Dlinknoteref-812">812</a> raised an army of seventy thousand men, and persisted to the last moment of her life in a fruitless rebellion, which, according to the fashion of the age, had been predicted by Christian hermits and Pagan magicians. While the East was afflicted by the passions of Verina, her daughter Ariadne was distinguished by the female virtues of mildness and fidelity; she followed her husband in his exile, and after his restoration, she implored his clemency in favor of her mother. On the decease of Zeno, Ariadne, the daughter, the mother, and the widow of an emperor, gave her hand and the Imperial title to Anastasius, an aged domestic of the palace, who survived his elevation above twenty-seven years, and whose character is attested by the acclamation of the people, "Reign as you have lived!" <a href="#Dlinknote-9" id="Dlinknoteref-9" name="Dlinknoteref-9">9</a> <a href="#Dlinknote-912" id="Dlinknoteref-912" name="Dlinknoteref-912">912</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-6" name="Dlinknote-6">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">6 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-6">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Theophanes (p. 111) inserts a copy of her sacred letters to the provinces. Such female pretensions would have astonished the slaves of the first Caesars.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-7" name="Dlinknote-7">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">7 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-7">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Vol. iii. p. 504—508.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-8" name="Dlinknote-8">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">8 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-8">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Suidas, tom. i. p. 332, 333, edit. Kuster.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-811" name="Dlinknote-811">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">811 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-811">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Joannes Lydus accuses Zeno of timidity, or, rather, of cowardice; he purchased an ignominious peace from the enemies of the empire, whom he dared not meet in battle; and employed his whole time at home in confiscations and executions. Lydus, de Magist. iii. 45, p. 230.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-812" name="Dlinknote-812">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">812 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-812">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Named Illus.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-9" name="Dlinknote-9">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">9 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-9">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The contemporary histories of Malchus and Candidus are lost; but some extracts or fragments have been saved by Photius, (lxxviii. lxxix. p. 100—102,) Constantine Porphyrogenitus, (Excerpt. Leg. p. 78—97,) and in various articles of the Lexicon of Suidas. The Chronicles of Marcellinus (Imago Historiae) are originals for the reigns of Zeno and Anastasius; and I must acknowledge, almost for the last time, my obligations to the large and accurate collections of Tillemont, (Hist. des Emp. tom. vi. p. 472—652).]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-912" name="Dlinknote-912">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">912 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-912">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The Panegyric of Procopius of Gaza, (edited by Villoison in his Anecdota Graeca, and reprinted in the new edition of the Byzantine historians by Niebuhr, in the same vol. with Dexippus and Eunapius, viii. p. 488 516,) was unknown to Gibbon. It is vague and pedantic, and contains few facts. The same criticism will apply to the poetical panegyric of Priscian edited from the Ms. of Bobbio by Ang. Mai. Priscian, the gram marian, Niebuhr argues from this work, must have been born in the African, not in either of the Asiatic Caesareas. Pref. p. xi.—M.]</p>
			<p>Whatever fear of affection could bestow, was profusely lavished by Zeno on the king of the Ostrogoths; the rank of patrician and consul, the command of the Palatine troops, an equestrian statue, a treasure in gold and silver of many thousand pounds, the name of son, and the promise of a rich and honorable wife. As long as Theodoric condescended to serve, he supported with courage and fidelity the cause of his benefactor; his rapid march contributed to the restoration of Zeno; and in the second revolt, the Walamirs, as they were called, pursued and pressed the Asiatic rebels, till they left an easy victory to the Imperial troops. <a href="#Dlinknote-10" id="Dlinknoteref-10" name="Dlinknoteref-10">10</a> But the faithful servant was suddenly converted into a formidable enemy, who spread the flames of war from Constantinople to the Adriatic; many flourishing cities were reduced to ashes, and the agriculture of Thrace was almost extirpated by the wanton cruelty of the Goths, who deprived their captive peasants of the right hand that guided the plough. <a href="#Dlinknote-11" id="Dlinknoteref-11" name="Dlinknoteref-11">11</a> On such occasions, Theodoric sustained the loud and specious reproach of disloyalty, of ingratitude, and of insatiate avarice, which could be only excused by the hard necessity of his situation. He reigned, not as the monarch, but as the minister of a ferocious people, whose spirit was unbroken by slavery, and impatient of real or imaginary insults. Their poverty was incurable; since the most liberal donatives were soon dissipated in wasteful luxury, and the most fertile estates became barren in their hands; they despised, but they envied, the laborious provincials; and when their subsistence had failed, the Ostrogoths embraced the familiar resources of war and rapine. It had been the wish of Theodoric (such at least was his declaration) to lead a peaceful, obscure, obedient life on the confines of Scythia, till the Byzantine court, by splendid and fallacious promises, seduced him to attack a confederate tribe of Goths, who had been engaged in the party of Basiliscus. He marched from his station in Maesia, on the solemn assurance that before he reached Adrianople, he should meet a plentiful convoy of provisions, and a reenforcement of eight thousand horse and thirty thousand foot, while the legions of Asia were encamped at Heraclea to second his operations. These measures were disappointed by mutual jealousy. As he advanced into Thrace, the son of Theodemir found an inhospitable solitude, and his Gothic followers, with a heavy train of horses, of mules, and of wagons, were betrayed by their guides among the rocks and precipices of Mount Sondis, where he was assaulted by the arms and invectives of Theodoric the son of Triarius. From a neighboring height, his artful rival harangued the camp of the Walamirs, and branded their leader with the opprobrious names of child, of madman, of perjured traitor, the enemy of his blood and nation. "Are you ignorant," exclaimed the son of Triarius, "that it is the constant policy of the Romans to destroy the Goths by each other's swords? Are you insensible that the victor in this unnatural contest will be exposed, and justly exposed, to their implacable revenge? Where are those warriors, my kinsmen and thy own, whose widows now lament that their lives were sacrificed to thy rash ambition? Where is the wealth which thy soldiers possessed when they were first allured from their native homes to enlist under thy standard? Each of them was then master of three or four horses; they now follow thee on foot, like slaves, through the deserts of Thrace; those men who were tempted by the hope of measuring gold with a bushel, those brave men who are as free and as noble as thyself." A language so well suited to the temper of the Goths excited clamor and discontent; and the son of Theodemir, apprehensive of being left alone, was compelled to embrace his brethren, and to imitate the example of Roman perfidy. <a href="#Dlinknote-12" id="Dlinknoteref-12" name="Dlinknoteref-12">12</a> <a href="#Dlinknote-1211" id="Dlinknoteref-1211" name="Dlinknoteref-1211">1211</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-10" name="Dlinknote-10">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">10 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-10">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ In ipsis congressionis tuae foribus cessit invasor, cum profugo per te sceptra redderentur de salute dubitanti. Ennodius then proceeds (p. 1596, 1597, tom. i. Sirmond.) to transport his hero (on a flying dragon?) into Aethiopia, beyond the tropic of Cancer. The evidence of the Valesian Fragment, (p. 717,) Liberatus, (Brev. Eutych. c. 25 p. 118,) and Theophanes, (p. 112,) is more sober and rational.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-11" name="Dlinknote-11">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">11 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-11">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ This cruel practice is specially imputed to the Triarian Goths, less barbarous, as it should seem, than the Walamirs; but the son of Theodemir is charged with the ruin of many Roman cities, (Malchus, Excerpt. Leg. p. 95.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-12" name="Dlinknote-12">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">12 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-12">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Jornandes (c. 56, 57, p. 696) displays the services of Theodoric, confesses his rewards, but dissembles his revolt, of which such curious details have been preserved by Malchus, (Excerpt. Legat. p. 78—97.) Marcellinus, a domestic of Justinian, under whose ivth consulship (A.D. 534) he composed his Chronicle, (Scaliger, Thesaurus Temporum, P. ii, p. 34—57,) betrays his prejudice and passion: in Graeciam debacchantem ...Zenonis munificentia pene pacatus...beneficiis nunquam satiatus, &amp;c.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-1211" name="Dlinknote-1211">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">1211 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-1211">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Gibbon has omitted much of the complicated intrigues of the Byzantine court with the two Theodorics. The weak emperor attempted to play them one against the other, and was himself in turn insulted, and the empire ravaged, by both. The details of the successive alliance and revolt, of hostility and of union, between the two Gothic chieftains, to dictate terms to the emperor, may be found in Malchus.—M.]</p>
			<p>In every state of his fortune, the prudence and firmness of Theodoric were equally conspicuous; whether he threatened Constantinople at the head of the confederate Goths, or retreated with a faithful band to the mountains and sea-coast of Epirus. At length the accidental death of the son of Triarius <a href="#Dlinknote-13" id="Dlinknoteref-13" name="Dlinknoteref-13">13</a> destroyed the balance which the Romans had been so anxious to preserve, the whole nation acknowledged the supremacy of the Amali, and the Byzantine court subscribed an ignominious and oppressive treaty. <a href="#Dlinknote-14" id="Dlinknoteref-14" name="Dlinknoteref-14">14</a> The senate had already declared, that it was necessary to choose a party among the Goths, since the public was unequal to the support of their united forces; a subsidy of two thousand pounds of gold, with the ample pay of thirteen thousand men, were required for the least considerable of their armies; <a href="#Dlinknote-15" id="Dlinknoteref-15" name="Dlinknoteref-15">15</a> and the Isaurians, who guarded not the empire but the emperor, enjoyed, besides the privilege of rapine, an annual pension of five thousand pounds. The sagacious mind of Theodoric soon perceived that he was odious to the Romans, and suspected by the Barbarians: he understood the popular murmur, that his subjects were exposed in their frozen huts to intolerable hardships, while their king was dissolved in the luxury of Greece, and he prevented the painful alternative of encountering the Goths, as the champion, or of leading them to the field, as the enemy, of Zeno. Embracing an enterprise worthy of his courage and ambition, Theodoric addressed the emperor in the following words: "Although your servant is maintained in affluence by your liberality, graciously listen to the wishes of my heart! Italy, the inheritance of your predecessors, and Rome itself, the head and mistress of the world, now fluctuate under the violence and oppression of Odoacer the mercenary. Direct me, with my national troops, to march against the tyrant. If I fall, you will be relieved from an expensive and troublesome friend: if, with the divine permission, I succeed, I shall govern in your name, and to your glory, the Roman senate, and the part of the republic delivered from slavery by my victorious arms." The proposal of Theodoric was accepted, and perhaps had been suggested, by the Byzantine court. But the forms of the commission, or grant, appear to have been expressed with a prudent ambiguity, which might be explained by the event; and it was left doubtful, whether the conqueror of Italy should reign as the lieutenant, the vassal, or the ally, of the emperor of the East. [16</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-13" name="Dlinknote-13">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">13 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-13">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ As he was riding in his own camp, an unruly horse threw him against the point of a spear which hung before a tent, or was fixed on a wagon, (Marcellin. in Chron. Evagrius, l. iii. c. 25.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-14" name="Dlinknote-14">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">14 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-14">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See Malchus (p. 91) and Evagrius, (l. iii. c. 35.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-15" name="Dlinknote-15">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">15 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-15">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Malchus, p. 85. In a single action, which was decided by the skill and discipline of Sabinian, Theodoric could lose 5000 men.] [Footnote 16: Jornandes (c. 57, p. 696, 697) has abridged the great history of Cassiodorus. See, compare, and reconcile Procopius, (Gothic. l. i. c. i.,) the Valesian Fragment, (p. 718,) Theophanes, (p. 113,) and Marcellinus, (in Chron.)]</p>
			<p>The reputation both of the leader and of the war diffused a universal ardor; the Walamirs were multiplied by the Gothic swarms already engaged in the service, or seated in the provinces, of the empire; and each bold Barbarian, who had heard of the wealth and beauty of Italy, was impatient to seek, through the most perilous adventures, the possession of such enchanting objects. The march of Theodoric must be considered as the emigration of an entire people; the wives and children of the Goths, their aged parents, and most precious effects, were carefully transported; and some idea may be formed of the heavy baggage that now followed the camp, by the loss of two thousand wagons, which had been sustained in a single action in the war of Epirus. For their subsistence, the Goths depended on the magazines of corn which was ground in portable mills by the hands of their women; on the milk and flesh of their flocks and herds; on the casual produce of the chase, and upon the contributions which they might impose on all who should presume to dispute the passage, or to refuse their friendly assistance. Notwithstanding these precautions, they were exposed to the danger, and almost to the distress, of famine, in a march of seven hundred miles, which had been undertaken in the depth of a rigorous winter. Since the fall of the Roman power, Dacia and Pannonia no longer exhibited the rich prospect of populous cities, well-cultivated fields, and convenient highways: the reign of barbarism and desolation was restored, and the tribes of Bulgarians, Gepidae, and Sarmatians, who had occupied the vacant province, were prompted by their native fierceness, or the solicitations of Odoacer, to resist the progress of his enemy. In many obscure though bloody battles, Theodoric fought and vanquished; till at length, surmounting every obstacle by skilful conduct and persevering courage, he descended from the Julian Alps, and displayed his invincible banners on the confines of Italy. <a href="#Dlinknote-17" id="Dlinknoteref-17" name="Dlinknoteref-17">17</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-17" name="Dlinknote-17">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">17 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-17">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Theodoric's march is supplied and illustrated by Ennodius, (p. 1598—1602,) when the bombast of the oration is translated into the language of common sense.]</p>
			<p>Odoacer, a rival not unworthy of his arms, had already occupied the advantageous and well-known post of the River Sontius, near the ruins of Aquileia, at the head of a powerful host, whose independent kings <a href="#Dlinknote-18" id="Dlinknoteref-18" name="Dlinknoteref-18">18</a> or leaders disdained the duties of subordination and the prudence of delays. No sooner had Theodoric gained a short repose and refreshment to his wearied cavalry, than he boldly attacked the fortifications of the enemy; the Ostrogoths showed more ardor to acquire, than the mercenaries to defend, the lands of Italy; and the reward of the first victory was the possession of the Venetian province as far as the walls of Verona. In the neighborhood of that city, on the steep banks of the rapid Adige, he was opposed by a new army, reenforced in its numbers, and not impaired in its courage: the contest was more obstinate, but the event was still more decisive; Odoacer fled to Ravenna, Theodoric advanced to Milan, and the vanquished troops saluted their conqueror with loud acclamations of respect and fidelity. But their want either of constancy or of faith soon exposed him to the most imminent danger; his vanguard, with several Gothic counts, which had been rashly intrusted to a deserter, was betrayed and destroyed near Faenza by his double treachery; Odoacer again appeared master of the field, and the invader, strongly intrenched in his camp of Pavia, was reduced to solicit the aid of a kindred nation, the Visigoths of Gaul. In the course of this History, the most voracious appetite for war will be abundantly satiated; nor can I much lament that our dark and imperfect materials do not afford a more ample narrative of the distress of Italy, and of the fierce conflict, which was finally decided by the abilities, experience, and valor of the Gothic king. Immediately before the battle of Verona, he visited the tent of his mother <a href="#Dlinknote-19" id="Dlinknoteref-19" name="Dlinknoteref-19">19</a> and sister, and requested, that on a day, the most illustrious festival of his life, they would adorn him with the rich garments which they had worked with their own hands. "Our glory," said he, "is mutual and inseparable. You are known to the world as the mother of Theodoric; and it becomes me to prove, that I am the genuine offspring of those heroes from whom I claim my descent." The wife or concubine of Theodemir was inspired with the spirit of the German matrons, who esteemed their sons' honor far above their safety; and it is reported, that in a desperate action, when Theodoric himself was hurried along by the torrent of a flying crowd, she boldly met them at the entrance of the camp, and, by her generous reproaches, drove them back on the swords of the enemy. <a href="#Dlinknote-20" id="Dlinknoteref-20" name="Dlinknoteref-20">20</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-18" name="Dlinknote-18">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">18 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-18">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Tot reges, &amp;c., (Ennodius, p. 1602.) We must recollect how much the royal title was multiplied and degraded, and that the mercenaries of Italy were the fragments of many tribes and nations.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-19" name="Dlinknote-19">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">19 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-19">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See Ennodius, p. 1603, 1604. Since the orator, in the king's presence, could mention and praise his mother, we may conclude that the magnanimity of Theodoric was not hurt by the vulgar reproaches of concubine and bastard. * Note: Gibbon here assumes that the mother of Theodoric was the concubine of Theodemir, which he leaves doubtful in the text.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-20" name="Dlinknote-20">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">20 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-20">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ This anecdote is related on the modern but respectable authority of Sigonius, (Op. tom. i. p. 580. De Occident. Impl. l. xv.:) his words are curious: "Would you return?" &amp;c. She presented and almost displayed the original recess. * Note: The authority of Sigonius would scarcely have weighed with Gibboa except for an indecent anecdote. I have a recollection of a similar story in some of the Italian wars.—M.]</p>
			<p>From the Alps to the extremity of Calabria, Theodoric reigned by the right of conquest; the Vandal ambassadors surrendered the Island of Sicily, as a lawful appendage of his kingdom; and he was accepted as the deliverer of Rome by the senate and people, who had shut their gates against the flying usurper. <a href="#Dlinknote-21" id="Dlinknoteref-21" name="Dlinknoteref-21">21</a> Ravenna alone, secure in the fortifications of art and nature, still sustained a siege of almost three years; and the daring sallies of Odoacer carried slaughter and dismay into the Gothic camp. At length, destitute of provisions and hopeless of relief, that unfortunate monarch yielded to the groans of his subjects and the clamors of his soldiers. A treaty of peace was negotiated by the bishop of Ravenna; the Ostrogoths were admitted into the city, and the hostile kings consented, under the sanction of an oath, to rule with equal and undivided authority the provinces of Italy. The event of such an agreement may be easily foreseen. After some days had been devoted to the semblance of joy and friendship, Odoacer, in the midst of a solemn banquet, was stabbed by the hand, or at least by the command, of his rival. Secret and effectual orders had been previously despatched; the faithless and rapacious mercenaries, at the same moment, and without resistance, were universally massacred; and the royalty of Theodoric was proclaimed by the Goths, with the tardy, reluctant, ambiguous consent of the emperor of the East. The design of a conspiracy was imputed, according to the usual forms, to the prostrate tyrant; but his innocence, and the guilt of his conqueror, <a href="#Dlinknote-22" id="Dlinknoteref-22" name="Dlinknoteref-22">22</a> are sufficiently proved by the advantageous treaty which force would not sincerely have granted, nor weakness have rashly infringed. The jealousy of power, and the mischiefs of discord, may suggest a more decent apology, and a sentence less rigorous may be pronounced against a crime which was necessary to introduce into Italy a generation of public felicity. The living author of this felicity was audaciously praised in his own presence by sacred and profane orators; <a href="#Dlinknote-23" id="Dlinknoteref-23" name="Dlinknoteref-23">23</a> but history (in his time she was mute and inglorious) has not left any just representation of the events which displayed, or of the defects which clouded, the virtues of Theodoric. <a href="#Dlinknote-24" id="Dlinknoteref-24" name="Dlinknoteref-24">24</a> One record of his fame, the volume of public epistles composed by Cassiodorus in the royal name, is still extant, and has obtained more implicit credit than it seems to deserve. <a href="#Dlinknote-25" id="Dlinknoteref-25" name="Dlinknoteref-25">25</a> They exhibit the forms, rather than the substance, of his government; and we should vainly search for the pure and spontaneous sentiments of the Barbarian amidst the declamation and learning of a sophist, the wishes of a Roman senator, the precedents of office, and the vague professions, which, in every court, and on every occasion, compose the language of discreet ministers. The reputation of Theodoric may repose with more confidence on the visible peace and prosperity of a reign of thirty-three years; the unanimous esteem of his own times, and the memory of his wisdom and courage, his justice and humanity, which was deeply impressed on the minds of the Goths and Italians.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-21" name="Dlinknote-21">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">21 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-21">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Hist. Miscell. l. xv., a Roman history from Janus to the ixth century, an Epitome of Eutropius, Paulus Diaconus, and Theophanes which Muratori has published from a Ms. in the Ambrosian library, (Script. Rerum Italicarum, tom. i. p. 100.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-22" name="Dlinknote-22">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">22 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-22">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius (Gothic. l. i. c. i.) approves himself an impartial sceptic. Cassiodorus (in Chron.) and Ennodius (p. 1604) are loyal and credulous, and the testimony of the Valesian Fragment (p. 718) may justify their belief. Marcellinus spits the venom of a Greek subject—perjuriis illectus, interfectusque est, (in Chron.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-23" name="Dlinknote-23">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">23 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-23">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The sonorous and servile oration of Ennodius was pronounced at Milan or Ravenna in the years 507 or 508, (Sirmond, tom. i. p. 615.) Two or three years afterwards, the orator was rewarded with the bishopric of Pavia, which he held till his death in the year 521. (Dupin, Bibliot. Eccles. tom. v. p. 11-14. See Saxii Onomasticon, tom. ii. p. 12.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-24" name="Dlinknote-24">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">24 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-24">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Our best materials are occasional hints from Procopius and the Valesian Fragment, which was discovered by Sirmond, and is published at the end of Ammianus Marcellinus. The author's name is unknown, and his style is barbarous; but in his various facts he exhibits the knowledge, without the passions, of a contemporary. The president Montesquieu had formed the plan of a history of Theodoric, which at a distance might appear a rich and interesting subject.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-25" name="Dlinknote-25">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">25 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-25">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The best edition of the Variarum Libri xii. is that of Joh. Garretius, (Rotomagi, 1679, in Opp. Cassiodor. 2 vols. in fol.;) but they deserved and required such an editor as the Marquis Scipio Maffei, who thought of publishing them at Verona. The Barbara Eleganza (as it is ingeniously named by Tiraboschi) is never simple, and seldom perspicuous]</p>
			<p>The partition of the lands of Italy, of which Theodoric assigned the third part to his soldiers, is honorably arraigned as the sole injustice of his life. <a href="#Dlinknote-2511" id="Dlinknoteref-2511" name="Dlinknoteref-2511">2511</a> And even this act may be fairly justified by the example of Odoacer, the rights of conquest, the true interest of the Italians, and the sacred duty of subsisting a whole people, who, on the faith of his promises, had transported themselves into a distant land. <a href="#Dlinknote-26" id="Dlinknoteref-26" name="Dlinknoteref-26">26</a> Under the reign of Theodoric, and in the happy climate of Italy, the Goths soon multiplied to a formidable host of two hundred thousand men, <a href="#Dlinknote-27" id="Dlinknoteref-27" name="Dlinknoteref-27">27</a> and the whole amount of their families may be computed by the ordinary addition of women and children. Their invasion of property, a part of which must have been already vacant, was disguised by the generous but improper name of hospitality; these unwelcome guests were irregularly dispersed over the face of Italy, and the lot of each Barbarian was adequate to his birth and office, the number of his followers, and the rustic wealth which he possessed in slaves and cattle. The distinction of noble and plebeian were acknowledged; <a href="#Dlinknote-28" id="Dlinknoteref-28" name="Dlinknoteref-28">28</a> but the lands of every freeman were exempt from taxes, <a href="#Dlinknote-2811" id="Dlinknoteref-2811" name="Dlinknoteref-2811">2811</a> and he enjoyed the inestimable privilege of being subject only to the laws of his country. <a href="#Dlinknote-29" id="Dlinknoteref-29" name="Dlinknoteref-29">29</a> Fashion, and even convenience, soon persuaded the conquerors to assume the more elegant dress of the natives, but they still persisted in the use of their mother-tongue; and their contempt for the Latin schools was applauded by Theodoric himself, who gratified their prejudices, or his own, by declaring, that the child who had trembled at a rod, would never dare to look upon a sword. <a href="#Dlinknote-30" id="Dlinknoteref-30" name="Dlinknoteref-30">30</a> Distress might sometimes provoke the indigent Roman to assume the ferocious manners which were insensibly relinquished by the rich and luxurious Barbarian; <a href="#Dlinknote-31" id="Dlinknoteref-31" name="Dlinknoteref-31">31</a> but these mutual conversions were not encouraged by the policy of a monarch who perpetuated the separation of the Italians and Goths; reserving the former for the arts of peace, and the latter for the service of war. To accomplish this design, he studied to protect his industrious subjects, and to moderate the violence, without enervating the valor, of his soldiers, who were maintained for the public defence. They held their lands and benefices as a military stipend: at the sound of the trumpet, they were prepared to march under the conduct of their provincial officers; and the whole extent of Italy was distributed into the several quarters of a well-regulated camp. The service of the palace and of the frontiers was performed by choice or by rotation; and each extraordinary fatigue was recompensed by an increase of pay and occasional donatives. Theodoric had convinced his brave companions, that empire must be acquired and defended by the same arts. After his example, they strove to excel in the use, not only of the lance and sword, the instruments of their victories, but of the missile weapons, which they were too much inclined to neglect; and the lively image of war was displayed in the daily exercise and annual reviews of the Gothic cavalry. A firm though gentle discipline imposed the habits of modesty, obedience, and temperance; and the Goths were instructed to spare the people, to reverence the laws, to understand the duties of civil society, and to disclaim the barbarous license of judicial combat and private revenge. <a href="#Dlinknote-32" id="Dlinknoteref-32" name="Dlinknoteref-32">32</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-2511" name="Dlinknote-2511">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">2511 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-2511">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Compare Gibbon, ch. xxxvi. vol. iii. p. 459, &amp;c.—Manso observes that this division was conducted not in a violent and irregular, but in a legal and orderly, manner. The Barbarian, who could not show a title of grant from the officers of Theodoric appointed for the purpose, or a prescriptive right of thirty years, in case he had obtained the property before the Ostrogothic conquest, was ejected from the estate. He conceives that estates too small to bear division paid a third of their produce.—Geschichte des Os Gothischen Reiches, p. 82.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-26" name="Dlinknote-26">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">26 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-26">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius, Gothic, l. i. c. i. Variarum, ii. Maffei (Verona Illustrata, P. i. p. 228) exaggerates the injustice of the Goths, whom he hated as an Italian noble. The plebeian Muratori crouches under their oppression.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-27" name="Dlinknote-27">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">27 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-27">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius, Goth. l. iii. c. 421. Ennodius describes (p. 1612, 1613) the military arts and increasing numbers of the Goths.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-28" name="Dlinknote-28">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">28 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-28">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ When Theodoric gave his sister to the king of the Vandals she sailed for Africa with a guard of 1000 noble Goths, each of whom was attended by five armed followers, (Procop. Vandal. l. i. c. 8.) The Gothic nobility must have been as numerous as brave.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-2811" name="Dlinknote-2811">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">2811 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-2811">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Manso (p. 100) quotes two passages from Cassiodorus to show that the Goths were not exempt from the fiscal claims.—Cassiodor, i. 19, iv. 14—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-29" name="Dlinknote-29">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">29 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-29">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the acknowledgment of Gothic liberty, (Var. v. 30.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-30" name="Dlinknote-30">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">30 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-30">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius, Goth. l. i. c. 2. The Roman boys learnt the language (Var. viii. 21) of the Goths. Their general ignorance is not destroyed by the exceptions of Amalasuntha, a female, who might study without shame, or of Theodatus, whose learning provoked the indignation and contempt of his countrymen.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-31" name="Dlinknote-31">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">31 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-31">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ A saying of Theodoric was founded on experience: "Romanus miser imitatur Gothum; ut utilis (dives) Gothus imitatur Romanum." (See the Fragment and Notes of Valesius, p. 719.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-32" name="Dlinknote-32">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">32 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-32">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The view of the military establishment of the Goths in Italy is collected from the Epistles of Cassiodorus (Var. i. 24, 40; iii. 3, 24, 48; iv. 13, 14; v. 26, 27; viii. 3, 4, 25.) They are illustrated by the learned Mascou, (Hist. of the Germans, l. xi. 40—44, Annotation xiv.) Note: Compare Manso, Geschichte des Ost Gothischen Reiches, p. 114.—M.]</p>
			<p>Among the Barbarians of the West, the victory of Theodoric had spread a general alarm. But as soon as it appeared that he was satisfied with conquest and desirous of peace, terror was changed into respect, and they submitted to a powerful mediation, which was uniformly employed for the best purposes of reconciling their quarrels and civilizing their manners. <a href="#Dlinknote-33" id="Dlinknoteref-33" name="Dlinknoteref-33">33</a> The ambassadors who resorted to Ravenna from the most distant countries of Europe, admired his wisdom, magnificence, <a href="#Dlinknote-34" id="Dlinknoteref-34" name="Dlinknoteref-34">34</a> and courtesy; and if he sometimes accepted either slaves or arms, white horses or strange animals, the gift of a sun-dial, a water-clock, or a musician, admonished even the princes of Gaul of the superior art and industry of his Italian subjects. His domestic alliances, <a href="#Dlinknote-35" id="Dlinknoteref-35" name="Dlinknoteref-35">35</a> a wife, two daughters, a sister, and a niece, united the family of Theodoric with the kings of the Franks, the Burgundians, the Visigoths, the Vandals, and the Thuringians, and contributed to maintain the harmony, or at least the balance, of the great republic of the West. <a href="#Dlinknote-36" id="Dlinknoteref-36" name="Dlinknoteref-36">36</a> It is difficult in the dark forests of Germany and Poland to pursue the emigrations of the Heruli, a fierce people who disdained the use of armor, and who condemned their widows and aged parents not to survive the loss of their husbands, or the decay of their strength. <a href="#Dlinknote-37" id="Dlinknoteref-37" name="Dlinknoteref-37">37</a> The king of these savage warriors solicited the friendship of Theodoric, and was elevated to the rank of his son, according to the barbaric rites of a military adoption. <a href="#Dlinknote-38" id="Dlinknoteref-38" name="Dlinknoteref-38">38</a> From the shores of the Baltic, the Aestians or Livonians laid their offerings of native amber <a href="#Dlinknote-39" id="Dlinknoteref-39" name="Dlinknoteref-39">39</a> at the feet of a prince, whose fame had excited them to undertake an unknown and dangerous journey of fifteen hundred miles. With the country <a href="#Dlinknote-40" id="Dlinknoteref-40" name="Dlinknoteref-40">40</a> from whence the Gothic nation derived their origin, he maintained a frequent and friendly correspondence: the Italians were clothed in the rich sables <a href="#Dlinknote-41" id="Dlinknoteref-41" name="Dlinknoteref-41">41</a> of Sweden; and one of its sovereigns, after a voluntary or reluctant abdication, found a hospitable retreat in the palace of Ravenna. He had reigned over one of the thirteen populous tribes who cultivated a small portion of the great island or peninsula of Scandinavia, to which the vague appellation of Thule has been sometimes applied. That northern region was peopled, or had been explored, as high as the sixty-eighth degree of latitude, where the natives of the polar circle enjoy and lose the presence of the sun at each summer and winter solstice during an equal period of forty days. <a href="#Dlinknote-42" id="Dlinknoteref-42" name="Dlinknoteref-42">42</a> The long night of his absence or death was the mournful season of distress and anxiety, till the messengers, who had been sent to the mountain tops, descried the first rays of returning light, and proclaimed to the plain below the festival of his resurrection. <a href="#Dlinknote-43" id="Dlinknoteref-43" name="Dlinknoteref-43">43</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-33" name="Dlinknote-33">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">33 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-33">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the clearness and vigor of his negotiations in Ennodius, (p. 1607,) and Cassiodorus, (Var. iii. 1, 2, 3, 4; iv. 13; v. 43, 44,) who gives the different styles of friendship, counsel expostulation, &amp;c.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-34" name="Dlinknote-34">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">34 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-34">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Even of his table (Var. vi. 9) and palace, (vii. 5.) The admiration of strangers is represented as the most rational motive to justify these vain expenses, and to stimulate the diligence of the officers to whom these provinces were intrusted.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-35" name="Dlinknote-35">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">35 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-35">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the public and private alliances of the Gothic monarch, with the Burgundians, (Var. i. 45, 46,) with the Franks, (ii. 40,) with the Thuringians, (iv. 1,) and with the Vandals, (v. 1;) each of these epistles affords some curious knowledge of the policy and manners of the Barbarians.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-36" name="Dlinknote-36">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">36 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-36">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ His political system may be observed in Cassiodorus, (Var. iv. l ix. l,) Jornandes, (c. 58, p. 698, 699,) and the Valesian Fragment, (p. 720, 721.) Peace, honorable peace, was the constant aim of Theodoric.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-37" name="Dlinknote-37">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">37 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-37">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The curious reader may contemplate the Heruli of Procopius, (Goth. l. ii. c. 14,) and the patient reader may plunge into the dark and minute researches of M. de Buat, (Hist. des Peuples Anciens, tom. ix. p. 348—396. * Note: Compare Manso, Ost Gothische Reich. Beylage, vi. Malte-Brun brings them from Scandinavia: their names, the only remains of their language, are Gothic. "They fought almost naked, like the Icelandic Berserkirs their bravery was like madness: few in number, they were mostly of royal blood. What ferocity, what unrestrained license, sullied their victories! The Goth respects the church, the priests, the senate; the Heruli mangle all in a general massacre: there is no pity for age, no refuge for chastity. Among themselves there is the same ferocity: the sick and the aged are put to death. at their own request, during a solemn festival; the widow ends her days by hanging herself upon the tree which shadows her husband's tomb. All these circumstances, so striking to a mind familiar with Scandinavian history, lead us to discover among the Heruli not so much a nation as a confederacy of princes and nobles, bound by an oath to live and die together with their arms in their hands. Their name, sometimes written Heruli or Eruli. sometimes Aeruli, signified, according to an ancient author, (Isid. Hispal. in gloss. p. 24, ad calc. Lex. Philolog. Martini, ll,) nobles, and appears to correspond better with the Scandinavian word iarl or earl, than with any of those numerous derivations proposed by etymologists." Malte-Brun, vol. i. p. 400, (edit. 1831.) Of all the Barbarians who threw themselves on the ruins of the Roman empire, it is most difficult to trace the origin of the Heruli. They seem never to have been very powerful as a nation, and branches of them are found in countries very remote from each other. In my opinion they belong to the Gothic race, and have a close affinity with the Scyrri or Hirri. They were, possibly, a division of that nation. They are often mingled and confounded with the Alani. Though brave and formidable. they were never numerous. nor did they found any state.—St. Martin, vol. vi. p. 375.—M. Schafarck considers them descendants of the Hirri. of which Heruli is a diminutive,—Slawische Alter thinner—M. 1845.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-38" name="Dlinknote-38">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">38 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-38">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Variarum, iv. 2. The spirit and forms of this martial institution are noticed by Cassiodorus; but he seems to have only translated the sentiments of the Gothic king into the language of Roman eloquence.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-39" name="Dlinknote-39">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">39 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-39">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Cassiodorus, who quotes Tacitus to the Aestians, the unlettered savages of the Baltic, (Var. v. 2,) describes the amber for which their shores have ever been famous, as the gum of a tree, hardened by the sun, and purified and wafted by the waves. When that singular substance is analyzed by the chemists, it yields a vegetable oil and a mineral acid.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-40" name="Dlinknote-40">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">40 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-40">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Scanzia, or Thule, is described by Jornandes (c. 3, p. 610—613) and Procopius, (Goth. l. ii. c. 15.) Neither the Goth nor the Greek had visited the country: both had conversed with the natives in their exile at Ravenna or Constantinople.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-41" name="Dlinknote-41">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">41 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-41">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Sapherinas pelles. In the time of Jornandes they inhabited Suethans, the proper Sweden; but that beautiful race of animals has gradually been driven into the eastern parts of Siberia. See Buffon, (Hist. Nat. tom. xiii. p. 309—313, quarto edition;) Pennant, (System of Quadrupeds, vol. i. p. 322—328;) Gmelin, (Hist. Gen des. Voyages, tom. xviii. p. 257, 258;) and Levesque, (Hist. de Russie, tom. v. p. 165, 166, 514, 515.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-42" name="Dlinknote-42">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">42 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-42">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ In the system or romance of Mr. Bailly, (Lettres sur les Sciences et sur l'Atlantide, tom. i. p. 249—256, tom. ii. p. 114—139,) the phoenix of the Edda, and the annual death and revival of Adonis and Osiris, are the allegorical symbols of the absence and return of the sun in the Arctic regions. This ingenious writer is a worthy disciple of the great Buffon; nor is it easy for the coldest reason to withstand the magic of their philosophy.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-43" name="Dlinknote-43">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">43 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-43">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Says Procopius. At present a rude Manicheism (generous enough) prevails among the Samoyedes in Greenland and in Lapland, (Hist. des Voyages, tom. xviii. p. 508, 509, tom. xix. p. 105, 106, 527, 528;) yet, according to Orotius Samojutae coelum atque astra adorant, numina haud aliis iniquiora, (de Rebus Belgicis, l. iv. p. 338, folio edition) a sentence which Tacitus would not have disowned.]</p>
			<p>The life of Theodoric represents the rare and meritorious example of a Barbarian, who sheathed his sword in the pride of victory and the vigor of his age. A reign of three and thirty years was consecrated to the duties of civil government, and the hostilities, in which he was sometimes involved, were speedily terminated by the conduct of his lieutenants, the discipline of his troops, the arms of his allies, and even by the terror of his name. He reduced, under a strong and regular government, the unprofitable countries of Rhaetia, Noricum, Dalmatia, and Pannonia, from the source of the Danube and the territory of the Bavarians, <a href="#Dlinknote-44" id="Dlinknoteref-44" name="Dlinknoteref-44">44</a> to the petty kingdom erected by the Gepidae on the ruins of Sirmium. His prudence could not safely intrust the bulwark of Italy to such feeble and turbulent neighbors; and his justice might claim the lands which they oppressed, either as a part of his kingdom, or as the inheritance of his father. The greatness of a servant, who was named perfidious because he was successful, awakened the jealousy of the emperor Anastasius; and a war was kindled on the Dacian frontier, by the protection which the Gothic king, in the vicissitude of human affairs, had granted to one of the descendants of Attila. Sabinian, a general illustrious by his own and father's merit, advanced at the head of ten thousand Romans; and the provisions and arms, which filled a long train of wagons, were distributed to the fiercest of the Bulgarian tribes. But in the fields of Margus, the eastern powers were defeated by the inferior forces of the Goths and Huns; the flower and even the hope of the Roman armies was irretrievably destroyed; and such was the temperance with which Theodoric had inspired his victorious troops, that, as their leader had not given the signal of pillage, the rich spoils of the enemy lay untouched at their feet. <a href="#Dlinknote-45" id="Dlinknoteref-45" name="Dlinknoteref-45">45</a> Exasperated by this disgrace, the Byzantine court despatched two hundred ships and eight thousand men to plunder the sea-coast of Calabria and Apulia: they assaulted the ancient city of Tarentum, interrupted the trade and agriculture of a happy country, and sailed back to the Hellespont, proud of their piratical victory over a people whom they still presumed to consider as their Roman brethren. <a href="#Dlinknote-46" id="Dlinknoteref-46" name="Dlinknoteref-46">46</a> Their retreat was possibly hastened by the activity of Theodoric; Italy was covered by a fleet of a thousand light vessels, <a href="#Dlinknote-47" id="Dlinknoteref-47" name="Dlinknoteref-47">47</a> which he constructed with incredible despatch; and his firm moderation was soon rewarded by a solid and honorable peace. He maintained, with a powerful hand, the balance of the West, till it was at length overthrown by the ambition of Clovis; and although unable to assist his rash and unfortunate kinsman, the king of the Visigoths, he saved the remains of his family and people, and checked the Franks in the midst of their victorious career. I am not desirous to prolong or repeat <a href="#Dlinknote-48" id="Dlinknoteref-48" name="Dlinknoteref-48">48</a> this narrative of military events, the least interesting of the reign of Theodoric; and shall be content to add, that the Alemanni were protected, <a href="#Dlinknote-49" id="Dlinknoteref-49" name="Dlinknoteref-49">49</a> that an inroad of the Burgundians was severely chastised, and that the conquest of Arles and Marseilles opened a free communication with the Visigoths, who revered him as their national protector, and as the guardian of his grandchild, the infant son of Alaric. Under this respectable character, the king of Italy restored the praetorian praefecture of the Gauls, reformed some abuses in the civil government of Spain, and accepted the annual tribute and apparent submission of its military governor, who wisely refused to trust his person in the palace of Ravenna. <a href="#Dlinknote-50" id="Dlinknoteref-50" name="Dlinknoteref-50">50</a> The Gothic sovereignty was established from Sicily to the Danube, from Sirmium or Belgrade to the Atlantic Ocean; and the Greeks themselves have acknowledged that Theodoric reigned over the fairest portion of the Western empire. <a href="#Dlinknote-51" id="Dlinknoteref-51" name="Dlinknoteref-51">51</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-44" name="Dlinknote-44">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">44 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-44">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the Hist. des Peuples Anciens, &amp;c., tom. ix. p. 255—273, 396—501. The count de Buat was French minister at the court of Bavaria: a liberal curiosity prompted his inquiries into the antiquities of the country, and that curiosity was the germ of twelve respectable volumes.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-45" name="Dlinknote-45">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">45 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-45">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the Gothic transactions on the Danube and the Illyricum, in Jornandes, (c. 58, p. 699;) Ennodius, (p. 1607-1610;) Marcellmus (in Chron. p. 44, 47, 48;) and Cassiodorus, in (in Chron and Var. iii. 29 50, iv. 13, vii. 4 24, viii. 9, 10, 11, 21, ix. 8, 9.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-46" name="Dlinknote-46">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">46 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-46">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ I cannot forbear transcribing the liberal and classic style of Count Marcellinus: Romanus comes domesticorum, et Rusticus comes scholariorum cum centum armatis navibus, totidemque dromonibus, octo millia militum armatorum secum ferentibus, ad devastanda Italiae littora processerunt, ut usque ad Tarentum antiquissimam civitatem aggressi sunt; remensoque mari in honestam victoriam quam piratico ausu Romani ex Romanis rapuerunt, Anastasio Caesari reportarunt, (in Chron. p. 48.) See Variar. i. 16, ii. 38.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-47" name="Dlinknote-47">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">47 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-47">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the royal orders and instructions, (Var. iv. 15, v. 16—20.) These armed boats should be still smaller than the thousand vessels of Agamemnon at the siege of Troy. (Manso, p. 121.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-48" name="Dlinknote-48">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">48 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-48">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Vol. iii. p. 581—585.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-49" name="Dlinknote-49">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">49 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-49">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Ennodius (p. 1610) and Cassiodorus, in the royal name, (Var. ii 41,) record his salutary protection of the Alemanni.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-50" name="Dlinknote-50">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">50 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-50">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The Gothic transactions in Gaul and Spain are represented with some perplexity in Cassiodorus, (Var. iii. 32, 38, 41, 43, 44, v. 39.) Jornandes, (c. 58, p. 698, 699,) and Procopius, (Goth. l. i. c. 12.) I will neither hear nor reconcile the long and contradictory arguments of the Abbe Dubos and the Count de Buat, about the wars of Burgundy.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-51" name="Dlinknote-51">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">51 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-51">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Theophanes, p. 113.]</p>
			<p>The union of the Goths and Romans might have fixed for ages the transient happiness of Italy; and the first of nations, a new people of free subjects and enlightened soldiers, might have gradually arisen from the mutual emulation of their respective virtues. But the sublime merit of guiding or seconding such a revolution was not reserved for the reign of Theodoric: he wanted either the genius or the opportunities of a legislator; <a href="#Dlinknote-52" id="Dlinknoteref-52" name="Dlinknoteref-52">52</a> and while he indulged the Goths in the enjoyment of rude liberty, he servilely copied the institutions, and even the abuses, of the political system which had been framed by Constantine and his successors. From a tender regard to the expiring prejudices of Rome, the Barbarian declined the name, the purple, and the diadem, of the emperors; but he assumed, under the hereditary title of king, the whole substance and plenitude of Imperial prerogative. <a href="#Dlinknote-53" id="Dlinknoteref-53" name="Dlinknoteref-53">53</a> His addresses to the eastern throne were respectful and ambiguous: he celebrated, in pompous style, the harmony of the two republics, applauded his own government as the perfect similitude of a sole and undivided empire, and claimed above the kings of the earth the same preeminence which he modestly allowed to the person or rank of Anastasius. The alliance of the East and West was annually declared by the unanimous choice of two consuls; but it should seem that the Italian candidate who was named by Theodoric accepted a formal confirmation from the sovereign of Constantinople. <a href="#Dlinknote-54" id="Dlinknoteref-54" name="Dlinknoteref-54">54</a> The Gothic palace of Ravenna reflected the image of the court of Theodosius or Valentinian. The Praetorian praefect, the praefect of Rome, the quaestor, the master of the offices, with the public and patrimonial treasurers, <a href="#Dlinknote-5411" id="Dlinknoteref-5411" name="Dlinknoteref-5411">5411</a> whose functions are painted in gaudy colors by the rhetoric of Cassiodorus, still continued to act as the ministers of state. And the subordinate care of justice and the revenue was delegated to seven consulars, three correctors, and five presidents, who governed the fifteen regions of Italy according to the principles, and even the forms, of Roman jurisprudence. <a href="#Dlinknote-55" id="Dlinknoteref-55" name="Dlinknoteref-55">55</a> The violence of the conquerors was abated or eluded by the slow artifice of judicial proceedings; the civil administration, with its honors and emoluments, was confined to the Italians; and the people still preserved their dress and language, their laws and customs, their personal freedom, and two thirds of their landed property. <a href="#Dlinknote-5511" id="Dlinknoteref-5511" name="Dlinknoteref-5511">5511</a> It had been the object of Augustus to conceal the introduction of monarchy; it was the policy of Theodoric to disguise the reign of a Barbarian. <a href="#Dlinknote-56" id="Dlinknoteref-56" name="Dlinknoteref-56">56</a> If his subjects were sometimes awakened from this pleasing vision of a Roman government, they derived more substantial comfort from the character of a Gothic prince, who had penetration to discern, and firmness to pursue, his own and the public interest. Theodoric loved the virtues which he possessed, and the talents of which he was destitute. Liberius was promoted to the office of Praetorian praefect for his unshaken fidelity to the unfortunate cause of Odoacer. The ministers of Theodoric, Cassiodorus, <a href="#Dlinknote-57" id="Dlinknoteref-57" name="Dlinknoteref-57">57</a> and Boethius, have reflected on his reign the lustre of their genius and learning. More prudent or more fortunate than his colleague, Cassiodorus preserved his own esteem without forfeiting the royal favor; and after passing thirty years in the honors of the world, he was blessed with an equal term of repose in the devout and studious solitude of Squillace. <a href="#Dlinknote-5711" id="Dlinknoteref-5711" name="Dlinknoteref-5711">5711</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-52" name="Dlinknote-52">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">52 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-52">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius affirms that no laws whatsoever were promulgated by Theodoric and the succeeding kings of Italy, (Goth. l. ii. c. 6.) He must mean in the Gothic language. A Latin edict of Theodoric is still extant, in one hundred and fifty-four articles. * Note: See Manso, 92. Savigny, vol. ii. p. 164, et seq.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-53" name="Dlinknote-53">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">53 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-53">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The image of Theodoric is engraved on his coins: his modest successors were satisfied with adding their own name to the head of the reigning emperor, (Muratori, Antiquitat. Italiae Medii Aevi, tom. ii. dissert. xxvii. p. 577—579. Giannone, Istoria Civile di Napoli tom. i. p. 166.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-54" name="Dlinknote-54">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">54 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-54">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The alliance of the emperor and the king of Italy are represented by Cassiodorus (Var. i. l, ii. 1, 2, 3, vi. l) and Procopius, (Goth. l. ii. c. 6, l. iii. c. 21,) who celebrate the friendship of Anastasius and Theodoric; but the figurative style of compliment was interpreted in a very different sense at Constantinople and Ravenna.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-5411" name="Dlinknote-5411">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">5411 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-5411">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ All causes between Roman and Roman were judged by the old Roman courts. The comes Gothorum judged between Goth and Goth; between Goths and Romans, (without considering which was the plaintiff.) the comes Gothorum, with a Roman jurist as his assessor, making a kind of mixed jurisdiction, but with a natural predominance to the side of the Goth Savigny, vol. i. p. 290.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-55" name="Dlinknote-55">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">55 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-55">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ To the xvii. provinces of the Notitia, Paul Warnefrid the deacon (De Reb. Longobard. l. ii. c. 14—22) has subjoined an xviiith, the Apennine, (Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum, tom. i. p. 431—443.) But of these Sardinia and Corsica were possessed by the Vandals, and the two Rhaetias, as well as the Cottian Alps, seem to have been abandoned to a military government. The state of the four provinces that now form the kingdom of Naples is labored by Giannone (tom. i. p. 172, 178) with patriotic diligence.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-5511" name="Dlinknote-5511">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">5511 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-5511">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Manso enumerates and develops at some length the following sources of the royal revenue of Theodoric: 1. A domain, either by succession to that of Odoacer, or a part of the third of the lands was reserved for the royal patrimony. 1. Regalia, including mines, unclaimed estates, treasure-trove, and confiscations. 3. Land tax. 4. Aurarium, like the Chrysargyrum, a tax on certain branches of trade. 5. Grant of Monopolies. 6. Siliquaticum, a small tax on the sale of all kinds of commodities. 7. Portoria, customs Manso, 96, 111. Savigny (i. 285) supposes that in many cases the property remained in the original owner, who paid his tertia, a third of the produce to the crown, vol. i. p. 285.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-56" name="Dlinknote-56">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">56 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-56">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the Gothic history of Procopius, (l. i. c. 1, l. ii. c. 6,) the Epistles of Cassiodorus, passim, but especially the vth and vith books, which contain the formulae, or patents of offices,) and the Civil History of Giannone, (tom. i. l. ii. iii.) The Gothic counts, which he places in every Italian city, are annihilated, however, by Maffei, (Verona Illustrata, P. i. l. viii. p. 227; for those of Syracuse and Naples (Var vi. 22, 23) were special and temporary commissions.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-57" name="Dlinknote-57">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">57 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-57">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Two Italians of the name of Cassiodorus, the father (Var. i. 24, 40) and the son, (ix. 24, 25,) were successively employed in the administration of Theodoric. The son was born in the year 479: his various epistles as quaestor, master of the offices, and Praetorian praefect, extend from 509 to 539, and he lived as a monk about thirty years, (Tiraboschi Storia della Letteratura Italiana, tom. iii. p. 7—24. Fabricius, Bibliot. Lat. Med. Aevi, tom. i. p. 357, 358, edit. Mansi.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-5711" name="Dlinknote-5711">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">5711 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-5711">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Cassiodorus was of an ancient and honorable family; his grandfather had distinguished himself in the defence of Sicily against the ravages of Genseric; his father held a high rank at the court of Valentinian III., enjoyed the friendship of Aetius, and was one of the ambassadors sent to arrest the progress of Attila. Cassiodorus himself was first the treasurer of the private expenditure to Odoacer, afterwards "count of the sacred largesses." Yielding with the rest of the Romans to the dominion of Theodoric, he was instrumental in the peaceable submission of Sicily; was successively governor of his native provinces of Bruttium and Lucania, quaestor, magister, palatii, Praetorian praefect, patrician, consul, and private secretary, and, in fact, first minister of the king. He was five times Praetorian praefect under different sovereigns, the last time in the reign of Vitiges. This is the theory of Manso, which is not unencumbered with difficulties. M. Buat had supposed that it was the father of Cassiodorus who held the office first named. Compare Manso, p. 85, &amp;c., and Beylage, vii. It certainly appears improbable that Cassiodorus should have been count of the sacred largesses at twenty years old.—M.]</p>
			<p>As the patron of the republic, it was the interest and duty of the Gothic king to cultivate the affections of the senate <a href="#Dlinknote-58" id="Dlinknoteref-58" name="Dlinknoteref-58">58</a> and people. The nobles of Rome were flattered by sonorous epithets and formal professions of respect, which had been more justly applied to the merit and authority of their ancestors. The people enjoyed, without fear or danger, the three blessings of a capital, order, plenty, and public amusements. A visible diminution of their numbers may be found even in the measure of liberality; <a href="#Dlinknote-59" id="Dlinknoteref-59" name="Dlinknoteref-59">59</a> yet Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily, poured their tribute of corn into the granaries of Rome an allowance of bread and meat was distributed to the indigent citizens; and every office was deemed honorable which was consecrated to the care of their health and happiness. The public games, such as the Greek ambassador might politely applaud, exhibited a faint and feeble copy of the magnificence of the Caesars: yet the musical, the gymnastic, and the pantomime arts, had not totally sunk in oblivion; the wild beasts of Africa still exercised in the amphitheatre the courage and dexterity of the hunters; and the indulgent Goth either patiently tolerated or gently restrained the blue and green factions, whose contests so often filled the circus with clamor and even with blood. <a href="#Dlinknote-60" id="Dlinknoteref-60" name="Dlinknoteref-60">60</a> In the seventh year of his peaceful reign, Theodoric visited the old capital of the world; the senate and people advanced in solemn procession to salute a second Trajan, a new Valentinian; and he nobly supported that character by the assurance of a just and legal government, <a href="#Dlinknote-61" id="Dlinknoteref-61" name="Dlinknoteref-61">61</a> in a discourse which he was not afraid to pronounce in public, and to inscribe on a tablet of brass. Rome, in this august ceremony, shot a last ray of declining glory; and a saint, the spectator of this pompous scene, could only hope, in his pious fancy, that it was excelled by the celestial splendor of the new Jerusalem. <a href="#Dlinknote-62" id="Dlinknoteref-62" name="Dlinknoteref-62">62</a> During a residence of six months, the fame, the person, and the courteous demeanor of the Gothic king, excited the admiration of the Romans, and he contemplated, with equal curiosity and surprise, the monuments that remained of their ancient greatness. He imprinted the footsteps of a conqueror on the Capitoline hill, and frankly confessed that each day he viewed with fresh wonder the forum of Trajan and his lofty column. The theatre of Pompey appeared, even in its decay, as a huge mountain artificially hollowed, and polished, and adorned by human industry; and he vaguely computed, that a river of gold must have been drained to erect the colossal amphitheatre of Titus. <a href="#Dlinknote-63" id="Dlinknoteref-63" name="Dlinknoteref-63">63</a> From the mouths of fourteen aqueducts, a pure and copious stream was diffused into every part of the city; among these the Claudian water, which arose at the distance of thirty-eight miles in the Sabine mountains, was conveyed along a gentle though constant declivity of solid arches, till it descended on the summit of the Aventine hill. The long and spacious vaults which had been constructed for the purpose of common sewers, subsisted, after twelve centuries, in their pristine strength; and these subterraneous channels have been preferred to all the visible wonders of Rome. <a href="#Dlinknote-64" id="Dlinknoteref-64" name="Dlinknoteref-64">64</a> The Gothic kings, so injuriously accused of the ruin of antiquity, were anxious to preserve the monuments of the nation whom they had subdued. <a href="#Dlinknote-65" id="Dlinknoteref-65" name="Dlinknoteref-65">65</a> The royal edicts were framed to prevent the abuses, the neglect, or the depredations of the citizens themselves; and a professed architect, the annual sum of two hundred pounds of gold, twenty-five thousand tiles, and the receipt of customs from the Lucrine port, were assigned for the ordinary repairs of the walls and public edifices. A similar care was extended to the statues of metal or marble of men or animals. The spirit of the horses, which have given a modern name to the Quirinal, was applauded by the Barbarians; <a href="#Dlinknote-66" id="Dlinknoteref-66" name="Dlinknoteref-66">66</a> the brazen elephants of the Via sacra were diligently restored; <a href="#Dlinknote-67" id="Dlinknoteref-67" name="Dlinknoteref-67">67</a> the famous heifer of Myron deceived the cattle, as they were driven through the forum of peace; <a href="#Dlinknote-68" id="Dlinknoteref-68" name="Dlinknoteref-68">68</a> and an officer was created to protect those works of rat, which Theodoric considered as the noblest ornament of his kingdom.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-58" name="Dlinknote-58">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">58 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-58">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See his regard for the senate in Cochlaeus, (Vit. Theod. viii. p. 72—80.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-59" name="Dlinknote-59">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">59 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-59">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ No more than 120,000 modii, or four thousand quarters, (Anonym. Valesian. p. 721, and Var. i. 35, vi. 18, xi. 5, 39.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-60" name="Dlinknote-60">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">60 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-60">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See his regard and indulgence for the spectacles of the circus, the amphitheatre, and the theatre, in the Chronicle and Epistles of Cassiodorus, (Var. i. 20, 27, 30, 31, 32, iii. 51, iv. 51, illustrated by the xivth Annotation of Mascou's History), who has contrived to sprinkle the subject with ostentatious, though agreeable, learning.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-61" name="Dlinknote-61">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">61 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-61">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Anonym. Vales. p. 721. Marius Aventicensis in Chron. In the scale of public and personal merit, the Gothic conqueror is at least as much above Valentinian, as he may seem inferior to Trajan.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-62" name="Dlinknote-62">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">62 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-62">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Vit. Fulgentii in Baron. Annal. Eccles. A.D. 500, No. 10.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-63" name="Dlinknote-63">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">63 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-63">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Cassiodorus describes in his pompous style the Forum of Trajan (Var. vii. 6,) the theatre of Marcellus, (iv. 51,) and the amphitheatre of Titus, (v. 42;) and his descriptions are not unworthy of the reader's perusal. According to the modern prices, the Abbe Barthelemy computes that the brick work and masonry of the Coliseum would now cost twenty millions of French livres, (Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii. p. 585, 586.) How small a part of that stupendous fabric!]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-64" name="Dlinknote-64">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">64 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-64">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ For the aqueducts and cloacae, see Strabo, (l. v. p. 360;) Pliny, (Hist. Natur. xxxvi. 24; Cassiodorus, Var. iii. 30, 31, vi. 6;) Procopius, (Goth. l. i. c. 19;) and Nardini, (Roma Antica, p. 514—522.) How such works could be executed by a king of Rome, is yet a problem. Note: See Niebuhr, vol. i. p. 402. These stupendous works are among the most striking confirmations of Niebuhr's views of the early Roman history; at least they appear to justify his strong sentence—"These works and the building of the Capitol attest with unquestionable evidence that this Rome of the later kings was the chief city of a great state."—Page 110—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-65" name="Dlinknote-65">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">65 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-65">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ For the Gothic care of the buildings and statues, see Cassiodorus (Var. i. 21, 25, ii. 34, iv. 30, vii. 6, 13, 15) and the Valesian Fragment, (p. 721.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-66" name="Dlinknote-66">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">66 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-66">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Var. vii. 15. These horses of Monte Cavallo had been transported from Alexandria to the baths of Constantine, (Nardini, p. 188.) Their sculpture is disdained by the Abbe Dubos, (Reflexions sur la Poesie et sur la Peinture, tom. i. section 39,) and admired by Winkelman, (Hist. de l'Art, tom. ii. p. 159.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-67" name="Dlinknote-67">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">67 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-67">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Var. x. 10. They were probably a fragment of some triumphal car, (Cuper de Elephantis, ii. 10.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-68" name="Dlinknote-68">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">68 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-68">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius (Goth. l. iv. c. 21) relates a foolish story of Myron's cow, which is celebrated by the false with of thirty-six Greek epigrams, (Antholog. l. iv. p. 302—306, edit. Hen. Steph.; Auson. Epigram. xiii.—lxviii.)]</p>
			<p>After the example of the last emperors, Theodoric preferred the residence of Ravenna, where he cultivated an orchard with his own hands. <a href="#Dlinknote-69" id="Dlinknoteref-69" name="Dlinknoteref-69">69</a> As often as the peace of his kingdom was threatened (for it was never invaded) by the Barbarians, he removed his court to Verona <a href="#Dlinknote-70" id="Dlinknoteref-70" name="Dlinknoteref-70">70</a> on the northern frontier, and the image of his palace, still extant on a coin, represents the oldest and most authentic model of Gothic architecture. These two capitals, as well as Pavia, Spoleto, Naples, and the rest of the Italian cities, acquired under his reign the useful or splendid decorations of churches, aqueducts, baths, porticos, and palaces. <a href="#Dlinknote-71" id="Dlinknoteref-71" name="Dlinknoteref-71">71</a> But the happiness of the subject was more truly conspicuous in the busy scene of labor and luxury, in the rapid increase and bold enjoyment of national wealth. From the shades of Tibur and Praeneste, the Roman senators still retired in the winter season to the warm sun, and salubrious springs of Baiae; and their villas, which advanced on solid moles into the Bay of Naples, commanded the various prospect of the sky, the earth, and the water. On the eastern side of the Adriatic, a new Campania was formed in the fair and fruitful province of Istria, which communicated with the palace of Ravenna by an easy navigation of one hundred miles. The rich productions of Lucania and the adjacent provinces were exchanged at the Marcilian fountain, in a populous fair annually dedicated to trade, intemperance, and superstition. In the solitude of Comum, which had once been animated by the mild genius of Pliny, a transparent basin above sixty miles in length still reflected the rural seats which encompassed the margin of the Larian lake; and the gradual ascent of the hills was covered by a triple plantation of olives, of vines, and of chestnut trees. <a href="#Dlinknote-72" id="Dlinknoteref-72" name="Dlinknoteref-72">72</a> Agriculture revived under the shadow of peace, and the number of husbandmen was multiplied by the redemption of captives. <a href="#Dlinknote-73" id="Dlinknoteref-73" name="Dlinknoteref-73">73</a> The iron mines of Dalmatia, a gold mine in Bruttium, were carefully explored, and the Pomptine marshes, as well as those of Spoleto, were drained and cultivated by private undertakers, whose distant reward must depend on the continuance of the public prosperity. <a href="#Dlinknote-74" id="Dlinknoteref-74" name="Dlinknoteref-74">74</a> Whenever the seasons were less propitious, the doubtful precautions of forming magazines of corn, fixing the price, and prohibiting the exportation, attested at least the benevolence of the state; but such was the extraordinary plenty which an industrious people produced from a grateful soil, that a gallon of wine was sometimes sold in Italy for less than three farthings, and a quarter of wheat at about five shillings and sixpence. <a href="#Dlinknote-75" id="Dlinknoteref-75" name="Dlinknoteref-75">75</a> A country possessed of so many valuable objects of exchange soon attracted the merchants of the world, whose beneficial traffic was encouraged and protected by the liberal spirit of Theodoric. The free intercourse of the provinces by land and water was restored and extended; the city gates were never shut either by day or by night; and the common saying, that a purse of gold might be safely left in the fields, was expressive of the conscious security of the inhabitants. <a id="Dlinknote-69" name="Dlinknote-69"><!-- Note --></a></p>
			<p class="foot">69 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-69">return</a>)<br/>
			 [See an epigram of Ennodius (ii. 3, p. 1893, 1894) on this garden and the royal gardener.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-70" name="Dlinknote-70">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">70 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-70">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ His affection for that city is proved by the epithet of "Verona tua," and the legend of the hero; under the barbarous name of Dietrich of Bern, (Peringsciold and Cochloeum, p. 240,) Maffei traces him with knowledge and pleasure in his native country, (l. ix. p. 230—236.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-71" name="Dlinknote-71">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">71 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-71">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See Maffei, (Verona Illustrata, Part i. p. 231, 232, 308, &amp;c.) His amputes Gothic architecture, like the corruption of language, writing &amp;c., not to the Barbarians, but to the Italians themselves. Compare his sentiments with those of Tiraboschi, (tom. iii. p. 61.) * Note: Mr. Hallam (vol. iii. p. 432) observes that "the image of Theodoric's palace" is represented in Maffei, not from a coin, but from a seal. Compare D'Agincourt (Storia dell'arte, Italian Transl., Arcitecttura, Plate xvii. No. 2, and Pittura, Plate xvi. No. 15,) where there is likewise an engraving from a mosaic in the church of St. Apollinaris in Ravenna, representing a building ascribed to Theodoric in that city. Neither of these, as Mr. Hallam justly observes, in the least approximates to what is called the Gothic style. They are evidently the degenerate Roman architecture, and more resemble the early attempts of our architects to get back from our national Gothic into a classical Greek style. One of them calls to mind Inigo Jones inner quadrangle in St. John's College Oxford. Compare Hallam and D'Agincon vol. i. p. 140—145.—M]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-72" name="Dlinknote-72">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">72 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-72">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The villas, climate, and landscape of Baiae, (Var. ix. 6; see Cluver Italia Antiq. l. iv. c. 2, p. 1119, &amp;c.,) Istria, (Var. xii. 22, 26,) and Comum, (Var. xi. 14; compare with Pliny's two villas, ix. 7,) are agreeably painted in the Epistles of Cassiodorus.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-73" name="Dlinknote-73">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">73 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-73">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ In Liguria numerosa agricolarum progenies, (Ennodius, p. 1678, 1679, 1680.) St. Epiphanius of Pavia redeemed by prayer or ransom 6000 captives from the Burgundians of Lyons and Savoy. Such deeds are the best of miracles.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-74" name="Dlinknote-74">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">74 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-74">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The political economy of Theodoric (see Anonym. Vales. p. 721, and Cassiodorus, in Chron.) may be distinctly traced under the following heads: iron mine, (Var. iii. 23;) gold mine, (ix. 3;) Pomptine marshes, (ii. 32, 33;) Spoleto, (ii. 21;) corn, (i. 34, x. 27, 28, xi. 11, 12;) trade, (vi. 7, vii. 9, 23;) fair of Leucothoe or St. Cyprian in Lucania, (viii. 33;) plenty, (xii. 4;) the cursus, or public post, (i. 29, ii. 31, iv. 47, v. 5, vi 6, vii. 33;) the Flaminian way, (xii. 18.) * Note: The inscription commemorative of the draining of the Pomptine marshes may be found in many works; in Gruter, Inscript. Ant. Heidelberg, p. 152, No. 8. With variations, in Nicolai De' bonificamenti delle terre Pontine, p. 103. In Sartorius, in his prize essay on the reign of Theodoric, and Manse Beylage, xi.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-75" name="Dlinknote-75">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">75 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-75">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ LX modii tritici in solidum ipsius tempore fuerunt, et vinum xxx amphoras in solidum, (Fragment. Vales.) Corn was distributed from the granaries at xv or xxv modii for a piece of gold, and the price was still moderate.]</p>
			<p>A difference of religion is always pernicious, and often fatal, to the harmony of the prince and people: the Gothic conqueror had been educated in the profession of Arianism, and Italy was devoutly attached to the Nicene faith. But the persuasion of Theodoric was not infected by zeal; and he piously adhered to the heresy of his fathers, without condescending to balance the subtile arguments of theological metaphysics. Satisfied with the private toleration of his Arian sectaries, he justly conceived himself to be the guardian of the public worship, and his external reverence for a superstition which he despised, may have nourished in his mind the salutary indifference of a statesman or philosopher. The Catholics of his dominions acknowledged, perhaps with reluctance, the peace of the church; their clergy, according to the degrees of rank or merit, were honorably entertained in the palace of Theodoric; he esteemed the living sanctity of Caesarius <a href="#Dlinknote-76" id="Dlinknoteref-76" name="Dlinknoteref-76">76</a> and Epiphanius, <a href="#Dlinknote-77" id="Dlinknoteref-77" name="Dlinknoteref-77">77</a> the orthodox bishops of Arles and Pavia; and presented a decent offering on the tomb of St. Peter, without any scrupulous inquiry into the creed of the apostle. <a href="#Dlinknote-78" id="Dlinknoteref-78" name="Dlinknoteref-78">78</a> His favorite Goths, and even his mother, were permitted to retain or embrace the Athanasian faith, and his long reign could not afford the example of an Italian Catholic, who, either from choice or compulsion, had deviated into the religion of the conqueror. <a href="#Dlinknote-79" id="Dlinknoteref-79" name="Dlinknoteref-79">79</a> The people, and the Barbarians themselves, were edified by the pomp and order of religious worship; the magistrates were instructed to defend the just immunities of ecclesiastical persons and possessions; the bishops held their synods, the metropolitans exercised their jurisdiction, and the privileges of sanctuary were maintained or moderated according to the spirit of the Roman jurisprudence. <a href="#Dlinknote-80" id="Dlinknoteref-80" name="Dlinknoteref-80">80</a> With the protection, Theodoric assumed the legal supremacy, of the church; and his firm administration restored or extended some useful prerogatives which had been neglected by the feeble emperors of the West. He was not ignorant of the dignity and importance of the Roman pontiff, to whom the venerable name of Pope was now appropriated. The peace or the revolt of Italy might depend on the character of a wealthy and popular bishop, who claimed such ample dominion both in heaven and earth; who had been declared in a numerous synod to be pure from all sin, and exempt from all judgment. <a href="#Dlinknote-81" id="Dlinknoteref-81" name="Dlinknoteref-81">81</a> When the chair of St. Peter was disputed by Symmachus and Laurence, they appeared at his summons before the tribunal of an Arian monarch, and he confirmed the election of the most worthy or the most obsequious candidate. At the end of his life, in a moment of jealousy and resentment, he prevented the choice of the Romans, by nominating a pope in the palace of Ravenna. The danger and furious contests of a schism were mildly restrained, and the last decree of the senate was enacted to extinguish, if it were possible, the scandalous venality of the papal elections. <a href="#Dlinknote-82" id="Dlinknoteref-82" name="Dlinknoteref-82">82</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-76" name="Dlinknote-76">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">76 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-76">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the life of St. Caesarius in Baronius, (A.D. 508, No. 12, 13, 14.) The king presented him with 300 gold solidi, and a discus of silver of the weight of sixty pounds.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-77" name="Dlinknote-77">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">77 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-77">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Ennodius in Vit. St. Epiphanii, in Sirmond, Op. tom. i. p. 1672—1690. Theodoric bestowed some important favors on this bishop, whom he used as a counsellor in peace and war.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-78" name="Dlinknote-78">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">78 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-78">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Devotissimus ac si Catholicus, (Anonym. Vales. p. 720;) yet his offering was no more than two silver candlesticks (cerostrata) of the weight of seventy pounds, far inferior to the gold and gems of Constantinople and France, (Anastasius in Vit. Pont. in Hormisda, p. 34, edit. Paris.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-79" name="Dlinknote-79">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">79 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-79">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The tolerating system of his reign (Ennodius, p. 1612. Anonym. Vales. p. 719. Procop. Goth. l. i. c. 1, l. ii. c. 6) may be studied in the Epistles of Cassiodorous, under the following heads: bishops, (Var. i. 9, vii. 15, 24, xi. 23;) immunities, (i. 26, ii. 29, 30;) church lands (iv. 17, 20;) sanctuaries, (ii. 11, iii. 47;) church plate, (xii. 20;) discipline, (iv. 44;) which prove, at the same time, that he was the head of the church as well as of the state. * Note: He recommended the same toleration to the emperor Justin.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-80" name="Dlinknote-80">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">80 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-80">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ We may reject a foolish tale of his beheading a Catholic deacon who turned Arian, (Theodor. Lector. No. 17.) Why is Theodoric surnamed After? From Vafer? (Vales. ad loc.) A light conjecture.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-81" name="Dlinknote-81">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">81 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-81">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Ennodius, p. 1621, 1622, 1636, 1638. His libel was approved and registered (synodaliter) by a Roman council, (Baronius, A.D. 503, No. 6, Franciscus Pagi in Breviar. Pont. Rom. tom. i. p. 242.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-82" name="Dlinknote-82">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">82 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-82">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See Cassiodorus, (Var. viii. 15, ix. 15, 16,) Anastasius, (in Symmacho, p. 31,) and the xviith Annotation of Mascou. Baronius, Pagi, and most of the Catholic doctors, confess, with an angry growl, this Gothic usurpation.]</p>
			<p>I have descanted with pleasure on the fortunate condition of Italy; but our fancy must not hastily conceive that the golden age of the poets, a race of men without vice or misery, was realized under the Gothic conquest. The fair prospect was sometimes overcast with clouds; the wisdom of Theodoric might be deceived, his power might be resisted and the declining age of the monarch was sullied with popular hatred and patrician blood. In the first insolence of victory, he had been tempted to deprive the whole party of Odoacer of the civil and even the natural rights of society; <a href="#Dlinknote-83" id="Dlinknoteref-83" name="Dlinknoteref-83">83</a> a tax unseasonably imposed after the calamities of war, would have crushed the rising agriculture of Liguria; a rigid preemption of corn, which was intended for the public relief, must have aggravated the distress of Campania. These dangerous projects were defeated by the virtue and eloquence of Epiphanius and Boethius, who, in the presence of Theodoric himself, successfully pleaded the cause of the people: <a href="#Dlinknote-84" id="Dlinknoteref-84" name="Dlinknoteref-84">84</a> but if the royal ear was open to the voice of truth, a saint and a philosopher are not always to be found at the ear of kings.</p>
			<p>The privileges of rank, or office, or favor, were too frequently abused by Italian fraud and Gothic violence, and the avarice of the king's nephew was publicly exposed, at first by the usurpation, and afterwards by the restitution of the estates which he had unjustly extorted from his Tuscan neighbors. Two hundred thousand Barbarians, formidable even to their master, were seated in the heart of Italy; they indignantly supported the restraints of peace and discipline; the disorders of their march were always felt and sometimes compensated; and where it was dangerous to punish, it might be prudent to dissemble, the sallies of their native fierceness. When the indulgence of Theodoric had remitted two thirds of the Ligurian tribute, he condescended to explain the difficulties of his situation, and to lament the heavy though inevitable burdens which he imposed on his subjects for their own defence. <a href="#Dlinknote-85" id="Dlinknoteref-85" name="Dlinknoteref-85">85</a> These ungrateful subjects could never be cordially reconciled to the origin, the religion, or even the virtues of the Gothic conqueror; past calamities were forgotten, and the sense or suspicion of injuries was rendered still more exquisite by the present felicity of the times.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-83" name="Dlinknote-83">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">83 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-83">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ He disabled them—alicentia testandi; and all Italy mourned—lamentabili justitio. I wish to believe, that these penalties were enacted against the rebels who had violated their oath of allegiance; but the testimony of Ennodius (p. 1675-1678) is the more weighty, as he lived and died under the reign of Theodoric.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-84" name="Dlinknote-84">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">84 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-84">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Ennodius, in Vit. Epiphan. p. 1589, 1690. Boethius de Consolatione Philosphiae, l. i. pros. iv. p. 45, 46, 47. Respect, but weigh the passions of the saint and the senator; and fortify and alleviate their complaints by the various hints of Cassiodorus, (ii. 8, iv. 36, viii. 5.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-85" name="Dlinknote-85">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">85 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-85">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Immanium expensarum pondus...pro ipsorum salute, &amp;c.; yet these are no more than words.]</p>
			<p>Even the religious toleration which Theodoric had the glory of introducing into the Christian world, was painful and offensive to the orthodox zeal of the Italians. They respected the armed heresy of the Goths; but their pious rage was safely pointed against the rich and defenceless Jews, who had formed their establishments at Naples, Rome, Ravenna, Milan, and Genoa, for the benefit of trade, and under the sanction of the laws. <a href="#Dlinknote-86" id="Dlinknoteref-86" name="Dlinknoteref-86">86</a> Their persons were insulted, their effects were pillaged, and their synagogues were burned by the mad populace of Ravenna and Rome, inflamed, as it should seem, by the most frivolous or extravagant pretences. The government which could neglect, would have deserved such an outrage. A legal inquiry was instantly directed; and as the authors of the tumult had escaped in the crowd, the whole community was condemned to repair the damage; and the obstinate bigots, who refused their contributions, were whipped through the streets by the hand of the executioner. <a href="#Dlinknote-8611" id="Dlinknoteref-8611" name="Dlinknoteref-8611">8611</a> This simple act of justice exasperated the discontent of the Catholics, who applauded the merit and patience of these holy confessors. Three hundred pulpits deplored the persecution of the church; and if the chapel of St. Stephen at Verona was demolished by the command of Theodoric, it is probable that some miracle hostile to his name and dignity had been performed on that sacred theatre. At the close of a glorious life, the king of Italy discovered that he had excited the hatred of a people whose happiness he had so assiduously labored to promote; and his mind was soured by indignation, jealousy, and the bitterness of unrequited love. The Gothic conqueror condescended to disarm the unwarlike natives of Italy, interdicting all weapons of offence, and excepting only a small knife for domestic use. The deliverer of Rome was accused of conspiring with the vilest informers against the lives of senators whom he suspected of a secret and treasonable correspondence with the Byzantine court. <a href="#Dlinknote-87" id="Dlinknoteref-87" name="Dlinknoteref-87">87</a> After the death of Anastasius, the diadem had been placed on the head of a feeble old man; but the powers of government were assumed by his nephew Justinian, who already meditated the extirpation of heresy, and the conquest of Italy and Africa. A rigorous law, which was published at Constantinople, to reduce the Arians by the dread of punishment within the pale of the church, awakened the just resentment of Theodoric, who claimed for his distressed brethren of the East the same indulgence which he had so long granted to the Catholics of his dominions. <a href="#Dlinknote-8711" id="Dlinknoteref-8711" name="Dlinknoteref-8711">8711</a> At his stern command, the Roman pontiff, with four illustrious senators, embarked on an embassy, of which he must have alike dreaded the failure or the success. The singular veneration shown to the first pope who had visited Constantinople was punished as a crime by his jealous monarch; the artful or peremptory refusal of the Byzantine court might excuse an equal, and would provoke a larger, measure of retaliation; and a mandate was prepared in Italy, to prohibit, after a stated day, the exercise of the Catholic worship. By the bigotry of his subjects and enemies, the most tolerant of princes was driven to the brink of persecution; and the life of Theodoric was too long, since he lived to condemn the virtue of Boethius and Symmachus. <a href="#Dlinknote-88" id="Dlinknoteref-88" name="Dlinknoteref-88">88</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-86" name="Dlinknote-86">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">86 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-86">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The Jews were settled at Naples, (Procopius, Goth. l. i. c. 8,) at Genoa, (Var. ii. 28, iv. 33,) Milan, (v. 37,) Rome, (iv. 43.) See likewise Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, tom. viii. c. 7, p. 254.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-8611" name="Dlinknote-8611">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">8611 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-8611">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See History of the Jews vol. iii. p. 217.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-87" name="Dlinknote-87">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">87 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-87">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Rex avidus communis exitii, &amp;c., (Boethius, l. i. p. 59:) rex colum Romanis tendebat, (Anonym. Vales. p. 723.) These are hard words: they speak the passions of the Italians and those (I fear) of Theodoric himself.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-8711" name="Dlinknote-8711">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">8711 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-8711">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Gibbon should not have omitted the golden words of Theodoric in a letter which he addressed to Justin: That to pretend to a dominion over the conscience is to usurp the prerogative of God; that by the nature of things the power of sovereigns is confined to external government; that they have no right of punishment but over those who disturb the public peace, of which they are the guardians; that the most dangerous heresy is that of a sovereign who separates from himself a part of his subjects because they believe not according to his belief. Compare Le Beau, vol viii. p. 68.—M]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-88" name="Dlinknote-88">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">88 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-88">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ I have labored to extract a rational narrative from the dark, concise, and various hints of the Valesian Fragment, (p. 722, 723, 724,) Theophanes, (p. 145,) Anastasius, (in Johanne, p. 35,) and the Hist Miscella, (p. 103, edit. Muratori.) A gentle pressure and paraphrase of their words is no violence. Consult likewise Muratori (Annali d' Italia, tom. iv. p. 471-478,) with the Annals and Breviary (tom. i. p. 259—263) of the two Pagis, the uncle and the nephew.]</p>
			<p>The senator Boethius <a href="#Dlinknote-89" id="Dlinknoteref-89" name="Dlinknoteref-89">89</a> is the last of the Romans whom Cato or Tully could have acknowledged for their countryman. As a wealthy orphan, he inherited the patrimony and honors of the Anician family, a name ambitiously assumed by the kings and emperors of the age; and the appellation of Manlius asserted his genuine or fabulous descent from a race of consuls and dictators, who had repulsed the Gauls from the Capitol, and sacrificed their sons to the discipline of the republic. In the youth of Boethius the studies of Rome were not totally abandoned; a Virgil <a href="#Dlinknote-90" id="Dlinknoteref-90" name="Dlinknoteref-90">90</a> is now extant, corrected by the hand of a consul; and the professors of grammar, rhetoric, and jurisprudence, were maintained in their privileges and pensions by the liberality of the Goths. But the erudition of the Latin language was insufficient to satiate his ardent curiosity: and Boethius is said to have employed eighteen laborious years in the schools of Athens, <a href="#Dlinknote-91" id="Dlinknoteref-91" name="Dlinknoteref-91">91</a> which were supported by the zeal, the learning, and the diligence of Proclus and his disciples. The reason and piety of their Roman pupil were fortunately saved from the contagion of mystery and magic, which polluted the groves of the academy; but he imbibed the spirit, and imitated the method, of his dead and living masters, who attempted to reconcile the strong and subtile sense of Aristotle with the devout contemplation and sublime fancy of Plato. After his return to Rome, and his marriage with the daughter of his friend, the patrician Symmachus, Boethius still continued, in a palace of ivory and marble, to prosecute the same studies. <a href="#Dlinknote-92" id="Dlinknoteref-92" name="Dlinknoteref-92">92</a> The church was edified by his profound defence of the orthodox creed against the Arian, the Eutychian, and the Nestorian heresies; and the Catholic unity was explained or exposed in a formal treatise by the indifference of three distinct though consubstantial persons. For the benefit of his Latin readers, his genius submitted to teach the first elements of the arts and sciences of Greece. The geometry of Euclid, the music of Pythagoras, the arithmetic of Nicomachus, the mechanics of Archimedes, the astronomy of Ptolemy, the theology of Plato, and the logic of Aristotle, with the commentary of Porphyry, were translated and illustrated by the indefatigable pen of the Roman senator. And he alone was esteemed capable of describing the wonders of art, a sun-dial, a water-clock, or a sphere which represented the motions of the planets. From these abstruse speculations, Boethius stooped, or, to speak more truly, he rose to the social duties of public and private life: the indigent were relieved by his liberality; and his eloquence, which flattery might compare to the voice of Demosthenes or Cicero, was uniformly exerted in the cause of innocence and humanity. Such conspicuous merit was felt and rewarded by a discerning prince: the dignity of Boethius was adorned with the titles of consul and patrician, and his talents were usefully employed in the important station of master of the offices. Notwithstanding the equal claims of the East and West, his two sons were created, in their tender youth, the consuls of the same year. <a href="#Dlinknote-93" id="Dlinknoteref-93" name="Dlinknoteref-93">93</a> On the memorable day of their inauguration, they proceeded in solemn pomp from their palace to the forum amidst the applause of the senate and people; and their joyful father, the true consul of Rome, after pronouncing an oration in the praise of his royal benefactor, distributed a triumphal largess in the games of the circus. Prosperous in his fame and fortunes, in his public honors and private alliances, in the cultivation of science and the consciousness of virtue, Boethius might have been styled happy, if that precarious epithet could be safely applied before the last term of the life of man.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-89" name="Dlinknote-89">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">89 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-89">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Le Clerc has composed a critical and philosophical life of Anicius Manlius Severinus Boetius, (Bibliot. Choisie, tom. xvi. p. 168—275;) and both Tiraboschi (tom. iii.) and Fabricius (Bibliot Latin.) may be usefully consulted. The date of his birth may be placed about the year 470, and his death in 524, in a premature old age, (Consol. Phil. Metrica. i. p. 5.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-90" name="Dlinknote-90">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">90 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-90">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ For the age and value of this Ms., now in the Medicean library at Florence, see the Cenotaphia Pisana (p. 430-447) of Cardinal Noris.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-91" name="Dlinknote-91">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">91 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-91">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The Athenian studies of Boethius are doubtful, (Baronius, A.D. 510, No. 3, from a spurious tract, De Disciplina Scholarum,) and the term of eighteen years is doubtless too long: but the simple fact of a visit to Athens is justified by much internal evidence, (Brucker, Hist. Crit. Philosoph. tom. iii. p. 524—527,) and by an expression (though vague and ambiguous) of his friend Cassiodorus, (Var. i. 45,) "longe positas Athenas intrioisti."]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-92" name="Dlinknote-92">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">92 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-92">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Bibliothecae comptos ebore ac vitro * parietes, &amp;c., (Consol. Phil. l. i. pros. v. p. 74.) The Epistles of Ennodius (vi. 6, vii. 13, viii. 1 31, 37, 40) and Cassiodorus (Var. i. 39, iv. 6, ix. 21) afford many proofs of the high reputation which he enjoyed in his own times. It is true, that the bishop of Pavia wanted to purchase of him an old house at Milan, and praise might be tendered and accepted in part of payment. * Note: Gibbon translated vitro, marble; under the impression, no doubt that glass was unknown.—M.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-93" name="Dlinknote-93">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">93 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-93">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Pagi, Muratori, &amp;c., are agreed that Boethius himself was consul in the year 510, his two sons in 522, and in 487, perhaps, his father. A desire of ascribing the last of these consulships to the philosopher had perplexed the chronology of his life. In his honors, alliances, children, he celebrates his own felicity—his past felicity, (p. 109 110)]</p>
			<p>A philosopher, liberal of his wealth and parsimonious of his time, might be insensible to the common allurements of ambition, the thirst of gold and employment. And some credit may be due to the asseveration of Boethius, that he had reluctantly obeyed the divine Plato, who enjoins every virtuous citizen to rescue the state from the usurpation of vice and ignorance. For the integrity of his public conduct he appeals to the memory of his country. His authority had restrained the pride and oppression of the royal officers, and his eloquence had delivered Paulianus from the dogs of the palace. He had always pitied, and often relieved, the distress of the provincials, whose fortunes were exhausted by public and private rapine; and Boethius alone had courage to oppose the tyranny of the Barbarians, elated by conquest, excited by avarice, and, as he complains, encouraged by impunity. In these honorable contests his spirit soared above the consideration of danger, and perhaps of prudence; and we may learn from the example of Cato, that a character of pure and inflexible virtue is the most apt to be misled by prejudice, to be heated by enthusiasm, and to confound private enmities with public justice. The disciple of Plato might exaggerate the infirmities of nature, and the imperfections of society; and the mildest form of a Gothic kingdom, even the weight of allegiance and gratitude, must be insupportable to the free spirit of a Roman patriot. But the favor and fidelity of Boethius declined in just proportion with the public happiness; and an unworthy colleague was imposed to divide and control the power of the master of the offices. In the last gloomy season of Theodoric, he indignantly felt that he was a slave; but as his master had only power over his life, he stood without arms and without fear against the face of an angry Barbarian, who had been provoked to believe that the safety of the senate was incompatible with his own. The senator Albinus was accused and already convicted on the presumption of hoping, as it was said, the liberty of Rome. "If Albinus be criminal," exclaimed the orator, "the senate and myself are all guilty of the same crime. If we are innocent, Albinus is equally entitled to the protection of the laws." These laws might not have punished the simple and barren wish of an unattainable blessing; but they would have shown less indulgence to the rash confession of Boethius, that, had he known of a conspiracy, the tyrant never should. <a href="#Dlinknote-94" id="Dlinknoteref-94" name="Dlinknoteref-94">94</a> The advocate of Albinus was soon involved in the danger and perhaps the guilt of his client; their signature (which they denied as a forgery) was affixed to the original address, inviting the emperor to deliver Italy from the Goths; and three witnesses of honorable rank, perhaps of infamous reputation, attested the treasonable designs of the Roman patrician. <a href="#Dlinknote-95" id="Dlinknoteref-95" name="Dlinknoteref-95">95</a> Yet his innocence must be presumed, since he was deprived by Theodoric of the means of justification, and rigorously confined in the tower of Pavia, while the senate, at the distance of five hundred miles, pronounced a sentence of confiscation and death against the most illustrious of its members. At the command of the Barbarians, the occult science of a philosopher was stigmatized with the names of sacrilege and magic. <a href="#Dlinknote-96" id="Dlinknoteref-96" name="Dlinknoteref-96">96</a> A devout and dutiful attachment to the senate was condemned as criminal by the trembling voices of the senators themselves; and their ingratitude deserved the wish or prediction of Boethius, that, after him, none should be found guilty of the same offence. <a href="#Dlinknote-97" id="Dlinknoteref-97" name="Dlinknoteref-97">97</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-94" name="Dlinknote-94">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">94 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-94">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Si ego scissem tu nescisses. Beothius adopts this answer (l. i. pros. 4, p. 53) of Julius Canus, whose philosophic death is described by Seneca, (De Tranquillitate Animi, c. 14.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-95" name="Dlinknote-95">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">95 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-95">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The characters of his two delators, Basilius (Var. ii. 10, 11, iv. 22) and Opilio, (v. 41, viii. 16,) are illustrated, not much to their honor, in the Epistles of Cassiodorus, which likewise mention Decoratus, (v. 31,) the worthless colleague of Beothius, (l. iii. pros. 4, p. 193.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-96" name="Dlinknote-96">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">96 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-96">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ A severe inquiry was instituted into the crime of magic, (Var. iv 22, 23, ix. 18;) and it was believed that many necromancers had escaped by making their jailers mad: for mad I should read drunk.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-97" name="Dlinknote-97">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">97 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-97">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Boethius had composed his own Apology, (p. 53,) perhaps more interesting than his Consolation. We must be content with the general view of his honors, principles, persecution, &amp;c., (l. i. pros. 4, p. 42—62,) which may be compared with the short and weighty words of the Valesian Fragment, (p. 723.) An anonymous writer (Sinner, Catalog. Mss. Bibliot. Bern. tom. i. p. 287) charges him home with honorable and patriotic treason.]</p>
			<p>While Boethius, oppressed with fetters, expected each moment the sentence or the stroke of death, he composed, in the tower of Pavia, the Consolation of Philosophy; a golden volume not unworthy of the leisure of Plato or Tully, but which claims incomparable merit from the barbarism of the times and the situation of the author. The celestial guide, whom he had so long invoked at Rome and Athens, now condescended to illumine his dungeon, to revive his courage, and to pour into his wounds her salutary balm. She taught him to compare his long prosperity and his recent distress, and to conceive new hopes from the inconstancy of fortune. Reason had informed him of the precarious condition of her gifts; experience had satisfied him of their real value; he had enjoyed them without guilt; he might resign them without a sigh, and calmly disdain the impotent malice of his enemies, who had left him happiness, since they had left him virtue. From the earth, Boethius ascended to heaven in search of the Supreme Good; explored the metaphysical labyrinth of chance and destiny, of prescience and free will, of time and eternity; and generously attempted to reconcile the perfect attributes of the Deity with the apparent disorders of his moral and physical government. Such topics of consolation so obvious, so vague, or so abstruse, are ineffectual to subdue the feelings of human nature. Yet the sense of misfortune may be diverted by the labor of thought; and the sage who could artfully combine in the same work the various riches of philosophy, poetry, and eloquence, must already have possessed the intrepid calmness which he affected to seek. Suspense, the worst of evils, was at length determined by the ministers of death, who executed, and perhaps exceeded, the inhuman mandate of Theodoric. A strong cord was fastened round the head of Boethius, and forcibly tightened, till his eyes almost started from their sockets; and some mercy may be discovered in the milder torture of beating him with clubs till he expired. <a href="#Dlinknote-98" id="Dlinknoteref-98" name="Dlinknoteref-98">98</a> But his genius survived to diffuse a ray of knowledge over the darkest ages of the Latin world; the writings of the philosopher were translated by the most glorious of the English kings, <a href="#Dlinknote-99" id="Dlinknoteref-99" name="Dlinknoteref-99">99</a> and the third emperor of the name of Otho removed to a more honorable tomb the bones of a Catholic saint, who, from his Arian persecutors, had acquired the honors of martyrdom, and the fame of miracles. <a href="#Dlinknote-100" id="Dlinknoteref-100" name="Dlinknoteref-100">100</a> In the last hours of Boethius, he derived some comfort from the safety of his two sons, of his wife, and of his father-in-law, the venerable Symmachus. But the grief of Symmachus was indiscreet, and perhaps disrespectful: he had presumed to lament, he might dare to revenge, the death of an injured friend. He was dragged in chains from Rome to the palace of Ravenna; and the suspicions of Theodoric could only be appeased by the blood of an innocent and aged senator. <a href="#Dlinknote-101" id="Dlinknoteref-101" name="Dlinknoteref-101">101</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-98" name="Dlinknote-98">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">98 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-98">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ He was executed in Agro Calventiano, (Calvenzano, between Marignano and Pavia,) Anonym. Vales. p. 723, by order of Eusebius, count of Ticinum or Pavia. This place of confinement is styled the baptistery, an edifice and name peculiar to cathedrals. It is claimed by the perpetual tradition of the church of Pavia. The tower of Boethius subsisted till the year 1584, and the draught is yet preserved, (Tiraboschi, tom. iii. p. 47, 48.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-99" name="Dlinknote-99">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">99 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-99">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the Biographia Britannica, Alfred, tom. i. p. 80, 2d edition. The work is still more honorable if performed under the learned eye of Alfred by his foreign and domestic doctors. For the reputation of Boethius in the middle ages, consult Brucker, (Hist. Crit. Philosoph. tom. iii. p. 565, 566.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-100" name="Dlinknote-100">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">100 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-100">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ The inscription on his new tomb was composed by the preceptor of Otho III., the learned Pope Silvester II., who, like Boethius himself, was styled a magician by the ignorance of the times. The Catholic martyr had carried his head in his hands a considerable way, (Baronius, A.D. 526, No. 17, 18;) and yet on a similar tale, a lady of my acquaintance once observed, "La distance n'y fait rien; il n'y a que lo remier pas qui coute." Note: Madame du Deffand. This witticism referred to the miracle of St. Denis.—G.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-101" name="Dlinknote-101">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">101 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-101">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Boethius applauds the virtues of his father-in-law, (l. i. pros. 4, p. 59, l. ii. pros. 4, p. 118.) Procopius, (Goth. l. i. c. i.,) the Valesian Fragment, (p. 724,) and the Historia Miscella, (l. xv. p. 105,) agree in praising the superior innocence or sanctity of Symmachus; and in the estimation of the legend, the guilt of his murder is equal to the imprisonment of a pope.]</p>
			<p>Humanity will be disposed to encourage any report which testifies the jurisdiction of conscience and the remorse of kings; and philosophy is not ignorant that the most horrid spectres are sometimes created by the powers of a disordered fancy, and the weakness of a distempered body. After a life of virtue and glory, Theodoric was now descending with shame and guilt into the grave; his mind was humbled by the contrast of the past, and justly alarmed by the invisible terrors of futurity. One evening, as it is related, when the head of a large fish was served on the royal table, <a href="#Dlinknote-102" id="Dlinknoteref-102" name="Dlinknoteref-102">102</a> he suddenly exclaimed, that he beheld the angry countenance of Symmachus, his eyes glaring fury and revenge, and his mouth armed with long sharp teeth, which threatened to devour him. The monarch instantly retired to his chamber, and, as he lay, trembling with aguish cold, under a weight of bed-clothes, he expressed, in broken murmurs to his physician Elpidius, his deep repentance for the murders of Boethius and Symmachus. <a href="#Dlinknote-103" id="Dlinknoteref-103" name="Dlinknoteref-103">103</a> His malady increased, and after a dysentery which continued three days, he expired in the palace of Ravenna, in the thirty-third, or, if we compute from the invasion of Italy, in the thirty-seventh year of his reign. Conscious of his approaching end, he divided his treasures and provinces between his two grandsons, and fixed the Rhone as their common boundary. <a href="#Dlinknote-104" id="Dlinknoteref-104" name="Dlinknoteref-104">104</a> Amalaric was restored to the throne of Spain. Italy, with all the conquests of the Ostrogoths, was bequeathed to Athalaric; whose age did not exceed ten years, but who was cherished as the last male offspring of the line of Amali, by the short-lived marriage of his mother Amalasuntha with a royal fugitive of the same blood. <a href="#Dlinknote-105" id="Dlinknoteref-105" name="Dlinknoteref-105">105</a> In the presence of the dying monarch, the Gothic chiefs and Italian magistrates mutually engaged their faith and loyalty to the young prince, and to his guardian mother; and received, in the same awful moment, his last salutary advice, to maintain the laws, to love the senate and people of Rome, and to cultivate with decent reverence the friendship of the emperor. <a href="#Dlinknote-106" id="Dlinknoteref-106" name="Dlinknoteref-106">106</a> The monument of Theodoric was erected by his daughter Amalasuntha, in a conspicuous situation, which commanded the city of Ravenna, the harbor, and the adjacent coast. A chapel of a circular form, thirty feet in diameter, is crowned by a dome of one entire piece of granite: from the centre of the dome four columns arose, which supported, in a vase of porphyry, the remains of the Gothic king, surrounded by the brazen statues of the twelve apostles. <a href="#Dlinknote-107" id="Dlinknoteref-107" name="Dlinknoteref-107">107</a> His spirit, after some previous expiation, might have been permitted to mingle with the benefactors of mankind, if an Italian hermit had not been witness, in a vision, to the damnation of Theodoric, <a href="#Dlinknote-108" id="Dlinknoteref-108" name="Dlinknoteref-108">108</a> whose soul was plunged, by the ministers of divine vengeance, into the volcano of Lipari, one of the flaming mouths of the infernal world. <a href="#Dlinknote-109" id="Dlinknoteref-109" name="Dlinknoteref-109">109</a></p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-102" name="Dlinknote-102">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">102 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-102">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ In the fanciful eloquence of Cassiodorus, the variety of sea and river fish are an evidence of extensive dominion; and those of the Rhine, of Sicily, and of the Danube, were served on the table of Theodoric, (Var. xii. 14.) The monstrous turbot of Domitian (Juvenal Satir. iii. 39) had been caught on the shores of the Adriatic.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-103" name="Dlinknote-103">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">103 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-103">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius, Goth. l. i. c. 1. But he might have informed us, whether he had received this curious anecdote from common report or from the mouth of the royal physician.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-104" name="Dlinknote-104">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">104 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-104">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Procopius, Goth. l. i. c. 1, 2, 12, 13. This partition had been directed by Theodoric, though it was not executed till after his death, Regni hereditatem superstes reliquit, (Isidor. Chron. p. 721, edit. Grot.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-105" name="Dlinknote-105">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">105 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-105">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Berimund, the third in descent from Hermanric, king of the Ostrogoths, had retired into Spain, where he lived and died in obscurity, (Jornandes, c. 33, p. 202, edit. Muratori.) See the discovery, nuptials, and death of his grandson Eutharic, (c. 58, p. 220.) His Roman games might render him popular, (Cassiodor. in Chron.,) but Eutharic was asper in religione, (Anonym. Vales. p. 723.)]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-106" name="Dlinknote-106">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">106 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-106">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ See the counsels of Theodoric, and the professions of his successor, in Procopius, (Goth. l. i. c. 1, 2,) Jornandes, (c. 59, p. 220, 221,) and Cassiodorus, (Var. viii. 1—7.) These epistles are the triumph of his ministerial eloquence.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-107" name="Dlinknote-107">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">107 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-107">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Anonym. Vales. p. 724. Agnellus de Vitis. Pont. Raven. in Muratori Script. Rerum Ital. tom. ii. P. i. p. 67. Alberti Descrittione d' Italia, p. 311. * Note: The Mausoleum of Theodoric, now Sante Maria della Rotonda, is engraved in D'Agincourt, Histoire de l'Art, p xviii. of the Architectural Prints.—M]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-108" name="Dlinknote-108">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">108 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-108">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ This legend is related by Gregory I., (Dialog. iv. 36,) and approved by Baronius, (A.D. 526, No. 28;) and both the pope and cardinal are grave doctors, sufficient to establish a probable opinion.]</p>
			<p>
				<a id="Dlinknote-109" name="Dlinknote-109">
					<!-- Note -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p class="foot">109 (<a href="#Dlinknoteref-109">return</a>)<br/>
			 [ Theodoric himself, or rather Cassiodorus, had described in tragic strains the volcanos of Lipari (Cluver. Sicilia, p. 406—410) and Vesuvius, (v 50.)]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
