<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 54</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-54" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      Chapter LIV: Origin And Doctrine Of The Paulicians.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Origin And Doctrine Of The Paulicians.—Their Persecution By
     The Greek Emperors.—Revolt In Armenia &amp;c.—Transplantation
     Into Thrace.—Propagation In The West.—The Seeds,
     Character, And Consequences Of The Reformation.
</pre>
<p>
      In the profession of Christianity, the variety of national characters may
      be clearly distinguished. The natives of Syria and Egypt abandoned their
      lives to lazy and contemplative devotion: Rome again aspired to the
      dominion of the world; and the wit of the lively and loquacious Greeks was
      consumed in the disputes of metaphysical theology. The incomprehensible
      mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation, instead of commanding their
      silent submission, were agitated in vehement and subtile controversies,
      which enlarged their faith at the expense, perhaps, of their charity and
      reason. From the council of Nice to the end of the seventh century, the
      peace and unity of the church was invaded by these spiritual wars; and so
      deeply did they affect the decline and fall of the empire, that the
      historian has too often been compelled to attend the synods, to explore
      the creeds, and to enumerate the sects, of this busy period of
      ecclesiastical annals. From the beginning of the eighth century to the
      last ages of the Byzantine empire, the sound of controversy was seldom
      heard: curiosity was exhausted, zeal was fatigued, and, in the decrees of
      six councils, the articles of the Catholic faith had been irrevocably
      defined. The spirit of dispute, however vain and pernicious, requires some
      energy and exercise of the mental faculties; and the prostrate Greeks were
      content to fast, to pray, and to believe in blind obedience to the
      patriarch and his clergy. During a long dream of superstition, the Virgin
      and the Saints, their visions and miracles, their relics and images, were
      preached by the monks, and worshipped by the people; and the appellation
      of people might be extended, without injustice, to the first ranks of
      civil society. At an unseasonable moment, the Isaurian emperors attempted
      somewhat rudely to awaken their subjects: under their influence reason
      might obtain some proselytes, a far greater number was swayed by interest
      or fear; but the Eastern world embraced or deplored their visible deities,
      and the restoration of images was celebrated as the feast of orthodoxy. In
      this passive and unanimous state the ecclesiastical rulers were relieved
      from the toil, or deprived of the pleasure, of persecution. The Pagans had
      disappeared; the Jews were silent and obscure; the disputes with the
      Latins were rare and remote hostilities against a national enemy; and the
      sects of Egypt and Syria enjoyed a free toleration under the shadow of the
      Arabian caliphs. About the middle of the seventh century, a branch of
      Manichaeans was selected as the victims of spiritual tyranny; their
      patience was at length exasperated to despair and rebellion; and their
      exile has scattered over the West the seeds of reformation. These
      important events will justify some inquiry into the doctrine and story of
      the Paulicians; <a href="#Elink54note-1" id="Elink54noteref-1" name="Elink54noteref-1">1</a> and, as they cannot plead for themselves, our
      candid criticism will magnify the good, and abate or suspect the evil,
      that is reported by their adversaries.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-1" name="Elink54note-1">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-1">return</a>)<br/> [ The errors and virtues of
      the Paulicians are weighed, with his usual judgment and candor, by the
      learned Mosheim, (Hist. Ecclesiast. seculum ix. p. 311, &amp;c.) He draws
      his original intelligence from Photius (contra Manichaeos, l. i.) and
      Peter Siculus, (Hist. Manichaeorum.) The first of these accounts has not
      fallen into my hands; the second, which Mosheim prefers, I have read in a
      Latin version inserted in the Maxima Bibliotheca Patrum, (tom. xvi. p.
      754-764,) from the edition of the Jesuit Raderus, (Ingolstadii, 1604, in
      4to.) * Note: Compare Hallam's Middle Ages, p. 461-471. Mr. Hallam justly
      observes that this chapter "appears to be accurate as well as luminous,
      and is at least far superior to any modern work on the subject."—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The Gnostics, who had distracted the infancy, were oppressed by the
      greatness and authority, of the church. Instead of emulating or surpassing
      the wealth, learning, and numbers of the Catholics, their obscure remnant
      was driven from the capitals of the East and West, and confined to the
      villages and mountains along the borders of the Euphrates. Some vestige of
      the Marcionites may be detected in the fifth century; <a href="#Elink54note-2" id="Elink54noteref-2" name="Elink54noteref-2">2</a> but
      the numerous sects were finally lost in the odious name of the
      Manichaeans; and these heretics, who presumed to reconcile the doctrines
      of Zoroaster and Christ, were pursued by the two religions with equal and
      unrelenting hatred. Under the grandson of Heraclius, in the neighborhood
      of Samosata, more famous for the birth of Lucian than for the title of a
      Syrian kingdom, a reformer arose, esteemed by the Paulicians as the chosen
      messenger of truth. In his humble dwelling of Mananalis, Constantine
      entertained a deacon, who returned from Syrian captivity, and received the
      inestimable gift of the New Testament, which was already concealed from
      the vulgar by the prudence of the Greek, and perhaps of the Gnostic,
      clergy. <a href="#Elink54note-3" id="Elink54noteref-3" name="Elink54noteref-3">3</a>
      These books became the measure of his studies and the rule of his faith;
      and the Catholics, who dispute his interpretation, acknowledge that his
      text was genuine and sincere. But he attached himself with peculiar
      devotion to the writings and character of St. Paul: the name of the
      Paulicians is derived by their enemies from some unknown and domestic
      teacher; but I am confident that they gloried in their affinity to the
      apostle of the Gentiles. His disciples, Titus, Timothy, Sylvanus,
      Tychicus, were represented by Constantine and his fellow-laborers: the
      names of the apostolic churches were applied to the congregations which
      they assembled in Armenia and Cappadocia; and this innocent allegory
      revived the example and memory of the first ages. In the Gospel, and the
      Epistles of St. Paul, his faithful follower investigated the Creed of
      primitive Christianity; and, whatever might be the success, a Protestant
      reader will applaud the spirit, of the inquiry. But if the Scriptures of
      the Paulicians were pure, they were not perfect. Their founders rejected
      the two Epistles of St. Peter, <a href="#Elink54note-4" id="Elink54noteref-4" name="Elink54noteref-4">4</a> the apostle of the
      circumcision, whose dispute with their favorite for the observance of the
      law could not easily be forgiven. <a href="#Elink54note-5" id="Elink54noteref-5" name="Elink54noteref-5">5</a> They agreed with their
      Gnostic brethren in the universal contempt for the Old Testament, the
      books of Moses and the prophets, which have been consecrated by the
      decrees of the Catholic church. With equal boldness, and doubtless with
      more reason, Constantine, the new Sylvanus, disclaimed the visions, which,
      in so many bulky and splendid volumes, had been published by the Oriental
      sects; <a href="#Elink54note-6" id="Elink54noteref-6" name="Elink54noteref-6">6</a>
      the fabulous productions of the Hebrew patriarchs and the sages of the
      East; the spurious gospels, epistles, and acts, which in the first age had
      overwhelmed the orthodox code; the theology of Manes, and the authors of
      the kindred heresies; and the thirty generations, or aeons, which had been
      created by the fruitful fancy of Valentine. The Paulicians sincerely
      condemned the memory and opinions of the Manichaean sect, and complained
      of the injustice which impressed that invidious name on the simple
      votaries of St. Paul and of Christ.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-2" name="Elink54note-2">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      2 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-2">return</a>)<br/> [ In the time of Theodoret,
      the diocese of Cyrrhus, in Syria, contained eight hundred villages. Of
      these, two were inhabited by Arians and Eunomians, and eight by
      Marcionites, whom the laborious bishop reconciled to the Catholic church,
      (Dupin, Bibliot. Ecclesiastique, tom. iv. p. 81, 82.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-3" name="Elink54note-3">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-3">return</a>)<br/> [ Nobis profanis ista
      (sacra Evangelia) legere non licet sed sacerdotibus duntaxat, was the
      first scruple of a Catholic when he was advised to read the Bible, (Petr.
      Sicul. p. 761.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-4" name="Elink54note-4">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-4">return</a>)<br/> [ In rejecting the second
      Epistle of St. Peter, the Paulicians are justified by some of the most
      respectable of the ancients and moderns, (see Wetstein ad loc., Simon,
      Hist. Critique du Nouveau Testament, c. 17.) They likewise overlooked the
      Apocalypse, (Petr. Sicul. p. 756;) but as such neglect is not imputed as a
      crime, the Greeks of the ixth century must have been careless of the
      credit and honor of the Revelations.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-5" name="Elink54note-5">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-5">return</a>)<br/> [ This contention, which
      has not escaped the malice of Porphyry, supposes some error and passion in
      one or both of the apostles. By Chrysostom, Jerome, and Erasmus, it is
      represented as a sham quarrel a pious fraud, for the benefit of the
      Gentiles and the correction of the Jews, (Middleton's Works, vol. ii. p.
      1-20.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-6" name="Elink54note-6">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-6">return</a>)<br/> [ Those who are curious of
      this heterodox library, may consult the researches of Beausobre, (Hist.
      Critique du Manicheisme, tom. i. p. 305-437.) Even in Africa, St. Austin
      could describe the Manichaean books, tam multi, tam grandes, tam pretiosi
      codices, (contra Faust. xiii. 14;) but he adds, without pity, Incendite
      omnes illas membranas: and his advice had been rigorously followed.]
    </p>
<p>
      Of the ecclesiastical chain, many links had been broken by the Paulician
      reformers; and their liberty was enlarged, as they reduced the number of
      masters, at whose voice profane reason must bow to mystery and miracle.
      The early separation of the Gnostics had preceded the establishment of the
      Catholic worship; and against the gradual innovations of discipline and
      doctrine they were as strongly guarded by habit and aversion, as by the
      silence of St. Paul and the evangelists. The objects which had been
      transformed by the magic of superstition, appeared to the eyes of the
      Paulicians in their genuine and naked colors. An image made without hands
      was the common workmanship of a mortal artist, to whose skill alone the
      wood and canvas must be indebted for their merit or value. The miraculous
      relics were a heap of bones and ashes, destitute of life or virtue, or of
      any relation, perhaps, with the person to whom they were ascribed. The
      true and vivifying cross was a piece of sound or rotten timber, the body
      and blood of Christ, a loaf of bread and a cup of wine, the gifts of
      nature and the symbols of grace. The mother of God was degraded from her
      celestial honors and immaculate virginity; and the saints and angels were
      no longer solicited to exercise the laborious office of mediation in
      heaven, and ministry upon earth. In the practice, or at least in the
      theory, of the sacraments, the Paulicians were inclined to abolish all
      visible objects of worship, and the words of the gospel were, in their
      judgment, the baptism and communion of the faithful. They indulged a
      convenient latitude for the interpretation of Scripture: and as often as
      they were pressed by the literal sense, they could escape to the intricate
      mazes of figure and allegory. Their utmost diligence must have been
      employed to dissolve the connection between the Old and the New Testament;
      since they adored the latter as the oracles of God, and abhorred the
      former as the fabulous and absurd invention of men or daemons. We cannot
      be surprised, that they should have found in the Gospel the orthodox
      mystery of the Trinity: but, instead of confessing the human nature and
      substantial sufferings of Christ, they amused their fancy with a celestial
      body that passed through the virgin like water through a pipe; with a
      fantastic crucifixion, that eluded the vain and important malice of the
      Jews. A creed thus simple and spiritual was not adapted to the genius of
      the times; <a href="#Elink54note-7" id="Elink54noteref-7" name="Elink54noteref-7">7</a> and the rational Christian, who might have been
      contented with the light yoke and easy burden of Jesus and his apostles,
      was justly offended, that the Paulicians should dare to violate the unity
      of God, the first article of natural and revealed religion. Their belief
      and their trust was in the Father, of Christ, of the human soul, and of
      the invisible world.
    </p>
<p>
      But they likewise held the eternity of matter; a stubborn and rebellious
      substance, the origin of a second principle of an active being, who has
      created this visible world, and exercises his temporal reign till the
      final consummation of death and sin. <a href="#Elink54note-8" id="Elink54noteref-8" name="Elink54noteref-8">8</a> The appearances of moral
      and physical evil had established the two principles in the ancient
      philosophy and religion of the East; from whence this doctrine was
      transfused to the various swarms of the Gnostics. A thousand shades may be
      devised in the nature and character of Ahriman, from a rival god to a
      subordinate daemon, from passion and frailty to pure and perfect
      malevolence: but, in spite of our efforts, the goodness, and the power, of
      Ormusd are placed at the opposite extremities of the line; and every step
      that approaches the one must recede in equal proportion from the other. <a href="#Elink54note-9" id="Elink54noteref-9" name="Elink54noteref-9">9</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-7" name="Elink54note-7">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      7 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-7">return</a>)<br/> [ The six capital errors of
      the Paulicians are defined by Peter (p. 756,) with much prejudice and
      passion.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-8" name="Elink54note-8">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-8">return</a>)<br/> [ Primum illorum axioma
      est, duo rerum esse principia; Deum malum et Deum bonum, aliumque hujus
      mundi conditorem et princi pem, et alium futuri aevi, (Petr. Sicul. 765.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-9" name="Elink54note-9">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      9 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-9">return</a>)<br/> [ Two learned critics,
      Beausobre (Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. i. iv. v. vi.) and Mosheim,
      (Institut. Hist. Eccles. and de Rebus Christianis ante Constantinum, sec.
      i. ii. iii.,) have labored to explore and discriminate the various systems
      of the Gnostics on the subject of the two principles.]
    </p>
<p>
      The apostolic labors of Constantine Sylvanus soon multiplied the number of
      his disciples, the secret recompense of spiritual ambition. The remnant of
      the Gnostic sects, and especially the Manichaeans of Armenia, were united
      under his standard; many Catholics were converted or seduced by his
      arguments; and he preached with success in the regions of Pontus <a href="#Elink54note-10" id="Elink54noteref-10" name="Elink54noteref-10">10</a>
      and Cappadocia, which had long since imbibed the religion of Zoroaster.
      The Paulician teachers were distinguished only by their Scriptural names,
      by the modest title of Fellow-pilgrims, by the austerity of their lives,
      their zeal or knowledge, and the credit of some extraordinary gifts of the
      Holy Spirit. But they were incapable of desiring, or at least of
      obtaining, the wealth and honors of the Catholic prelacy; such
      anti-Christian pride they bitterly censured; and even the rank of elders
      or presbyters was condemned as an institution of the Jewish synagogue. The
      new sect was loosely spread over the provinces of Asia Minor to the
      westward of the Euphrates; six of their principal congregations
      represented the churches to which St. Paul had addressed his epistles; and
      their founder chose his residence in the neighborhood of Colonia, <a href="#Elink54note-11" id="Elink54noteref-11" name="Elink54noteref-11">11</a>
      in the same district of Pontus which had been celebrated by the altars of
      Bellona <a href="#Elink54note-12" id="Elink54noteref-12" name="Elink54noteref-12">12</a> and the miracles of Gregory. <a href="#Elink54note-13" id="Elink54noteref-13" name="Elink54noteref-13">13</a>
      After a mission of twenty-seven years, Sylvanus, who had retired from the
      tolerating government of the Arabs, fell a sacrifice to Roman persecution.
      The laws of the pious emperors, which seldom touched the lives of less
      odious heretics, proscribed without mercy or disguise the tenets, the
      books, and the persons of the Montanists and Manichaeans: the books were
      delivered to the flames; and all who should presume to secrete such
      writings, or to profess such opinions, were devoted to an ignominious
      death. <a href="#Elink54note-14" id="Elink54noteref-14" name="Elink54noteref-14">14</a> A Greek minister, armed with legal and
      military powers, appeared at Colonia to strike the shepherd, and to
      reclaim, if possible, the lost sheep. By a refinement of cruelty, Simeon
      placed the unfortunate Sylvanus before a line of his disciples, who were
      commanded, as the price of their pardon and the proof of their repentance,
      to massacre their spiritual father. They turned aside from the impious
      office; the stones dropped from their filial hands, and of the whole
      number, only one executioner could be found, a new David, as he is styled
      by the Catholics, who boldly overthrew the giant of heresy. This apostate
      (Justin was his name) again deceived and betrayed his unsuspecting
      brethren, and a new conformity to the acts of St. Paul may be found in the
      conversion of Simeon: like the apostle, he embraced the doctrine which he
      had been sent to persecute, renounced his honors and fortunes, and
      required among the Paulicians the fame of a missionary and a martyr. They
      were not ambitious of martyrdom, <a href="#Elink54note-15" id="Elink54noteref-15" name="Elink54noteref-15">15</a> but in a calamitous
      period of one hundred and fifty years, their patience sustained whatever
      zeal could inflict; and power was insufficient to eradicate the obstinate
      vegetation of fanaticism and reason. From the blood and ashes of the first
      victims, a succession of teachers and congregations repeatedly arose:
      amidst their foreign hostilities, they found leisure for domestic
      quarrels: they preached, they disputed, they suffered; and the virtues,
      the apparent virtues, of Sergius, in a pilgrimage of thirty-three years,
      are reluctantly confessed by the orthodox historians. <a href="#Elink54note-16" id="Elink54noteref-16" name="Elink54noteref-16">16</a>
      The native cruelty of Justinian the Second was stimulated by a pious
      cause; and he vainly hoped to extinguish, in a single conflagration, the
      name and memory of the Paulicians. By their primitive simplicity, their
      abhorrence of popular superstition, the Iconoclast princes might have been
      reconciled to some erroneous doctrines; but they themselves were exposed
      to the calumnies of the monks, and they chose to be the tyrants, lest they
      should be accused as the accomplices, of the Manichaeans. Such a reproach
      has sullied the clemency of Nicephorus, who relaxed in their favor the
      severity of the penal statutes, nor will his character sustain the honor
      of a more liberal motive. The feeble Michael the First, the rigid Leo the
      Armenian, were foremost in the race of persecution; but the prize must
      doubtless be adjudged to the sanguinary devotion of Theodora, who restored
      the images to the Oriental church. Her inquisitors explored the cities and
      mountains of the Lesser Asia, and the flatterers of the empress have
      affirmed that, in a short reign, one hundred thousand Paulicians were
      extirpated by the sword, the gibbet, or the flames. Her guilt or merit has
      perhaps been stretched beyond the measure of truth: but if the account be
      allowed, it must be presumed that many simple Iconoclasts were punished
      under a more odious name; and that some who were driven from the church,
      unwillingly took refuge in the bosom of heresy.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-10" name="Elink54note-10">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      10 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-10">return</a>)<br/> [ The countries between
      the Euphrates and the Halys were possessed above 350 years by the Medes
      (Herodot. l. i. c. 103) and Persians; and the kings of Pontus were of the
      royal race of the Achaemenides, (Sallust. Fragment. l. iii. with the
      French supplement and notes of the president de Brosses.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-11" name="Elink54note-11">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      11 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-11">return</a>)<br/> [ Most probably founded
      by Pompey after the conquest of Pontus. This Colonia, on the Lycus, above
      Neo-Caesarea, is named by the Turks Coulei-hisar, or Chonac, a populous
      town in a strong country, (D'Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. ii. p. 34.
      Tournefort, Voyage du Levant, tom. iii. lettre xxi. p. 293.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-12" name="Elink54note-12">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      12 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-12">return</a>)<br/> [ The temple of Bellona,
      at Comana in Pontus was a powerful and wealthy foundation, and the high
      priest was respected as the second person in the kingdom. As the
      sacerdotal office had been occupied by his mother's family, Strabo (l.
      xii. p. 809, 835, 836, 837) dwells with peculiar complacency on the
      temple, the worship, and festival, which was twice celebrated every year.
      But the Bellona of Pontus had the features and character of the goddess,
      not of war, but of love.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-13" name="Elink54note-13">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      13 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-13">return</a>)<br/> [ Gregory, bishop of
      Neo-Caesarea, (A.D. 240-265,) surnamed Thaumaturgus, or the Wonder-worker.
      An hundred years afterwards, the history or romance of his life was
      composed by Gregory of Nyssa, his namesake and countryman, the brother of
      the great St. Basil.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-14" name="Elink54note-14">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      14 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-14">return</a>)<br/> [ Hoc caeterum ad sua
      egregia facinora, divini atque orthodoxi Imperatores addiderunt, ut
      Manichaeos Montanosque capitali puniri sententia juberent, eorumque
      libros, quocunque in loco inventi essent, flammis tradi; quod siquis
      uspiam eosdem occultasse deprehenderetur, hunc eundem mortis poenae
      addici, ejusque bona in fiscum inferri, (Petr. Sicul. p. 759.) What more
      could bigotry and persecution desire?]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-15" name="Elink54note-15">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      15 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-15">return</a>)<br/> [ It should seem, that
      the Paulicians allowed themselves some latitude of equivocation and mental
      reservation; till the Catholics discovered the pressing questions, which
      reduced them to the alternative of apostasy or martyrdom, (Petr. Sicul. p.
      760.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-16" name="Elink54note-16">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      16 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-16">return</a>)<br/> [ The persecution is told
      by Petrus Siculus (p. 579-763) with satisfaction and pleasantry. Justus
      justa persolvit. See likewise Cedrenus, (p. 432-435.)]
    </p>
<p>
      The most furious and desperate of rebels are the sectaries of a religion
      long persecuted, and at length provoked. In a holy cause they are no
      longer susceptible of fear or remorse: the justice of their arms hardens
      them against the feelings of humanity; and they revenge their fathers'
      wrongs on the children of their tyrants. Such have been the Hussites of
      Bohemia and the Calvinists of France, and such, in the ninth century, were
      the Paulicians of Armenia and the adjacent provinces. <a href="#Elink54note-17" id="Elink54noteref-17" name="Elink54noteref-17">17</a>
      They were first awakened to the massacre of a governor and bishop, who
      exercised the Imperial mandate of converting or destroying the heretics;
      and the deepest recesses of Mount Argaeus protected their independence and
      revenge. A more dangerous and consuming flame was kindled by the
      persecution of Theodora, and the revolt of Carbeas, a valiant Paulician,
      who commanded the guards of the general of the East. His father had been
      impaled by the Catholic inquisitors; and religion, or at least nature,
      might justify his desertion and revenge. Five thousand of his brethren
      were united by the same motives; they renounced the allegiance of
      anti-Christian Rome; a Saracen emir introduced Carbeas to the caliph; and
      the commander of the faithful extended his sceptre to the implacable enemy
      of the Greeks. In the mountains between Siwas and Trebizond he founded or
      fortified the city of Tephrice, <a href="#Elink54note-18" id="Elink54noteref-18" name="Elink54noteref-18">18</a> which is still
      occupied by a fierce or licentious people, and the neighboring hills were
      covered with the Paulician fugitives, who now reconciled the use of the
      Bible and the sword. During more than thirty years, Asia was afflicted by
      the calamities of foreign and domestic war; in their hostile inroads, the
      disciples of St. Paul were joined with those of Mahomet; and the peaceful
      Christians, the aged parent and tender virgin, who were delivered into
      barbarous servitude, might justly accuse the intolerant spirit of their
      sovereign. So urgent was the mischief, so intolerable the shame, that even
      the dissolute Michael, the son of Theodora, was compelled to march in
      person against the Paulicians: he was defeated under the walls of
      Samosata; and the Roman emperor fled before the heretics whom his mother
      had condemned to the flames. The Saracens fought under the same banners,
      but the victory was ascribed to Carbeas; and the captive generals, with
      more than a hundred tribunes, were either released by his avarice, or
      tortured by his fanaticism. The valor and ambition of Chrysocheir, <a href="#Elink54note-19" id="Elink54noteref-19" name="Elink54noteref-19">19</a>
      his successor, embraced a wider circle of rapine and revenge. In alliance
      with his faithful Moslems, he boldly penetrated into the heart of Asia;
      the troops of the frontier and the palace were repeatedly overthrown; the
      edicts of persecution were answered by the pillage of Nice and Nicomedia,
      of Ancyra and Ephesus; nor could the apostle St. John protect from
      violation his city and sepulchre. The cathedral of Ephesus was turned into
      a stable for mules and horses; and the Paulicians vied with the Saracens
      in their contempt and abhorrence of images and relics. It is not
      unpleasing to observe the triumph of rebellion over the same despotism
      which had disdained the prayers of an injured people. The emperor Basil,
      the Macedonian, was reduced to sue for peace, to offer a ransom for the
      captives, and to request, in the language of moderation and charity, that
      Chrysocheir would spare his fellow-Christians, and content himself with a
      royal donative of gold and silver and silk garments. "If the emperor,"
      replied the insolent fanatic, "be desirous of peace, let him abdicate the
      East, and reign without molestation in the West. If he refuse, the
      servants of the Lord will precipitate him from the throne." The reluctant
      Basil suspended the treaty, accepted the defiance, and led his army into
      the land of heresy, which he wasted with fire and sword. The open country
      of the Paulicians was exposed to the same calamities which they had
      inflicted; but when he had explored the strength of Tephrice, the
      multitude of the Barbarians, and the ample magazines of arms and
      provisions, he desisted with a sigh from the hopeless siege. On his return
      to Constantinople, he labored, by the foundation of convents and churches,
      to secure the aid of his celestial patrons, of Michael the archangel and
      the prophet Elijah; and it was his daily prayer that he might live to
      transpierce, with three arrows, the head of his impious adversary. Beyond
      his expectations, the wish was accomplished: after a successful inroad,
      Chrysocheir was surprised and slain in his retreat; and the rebel's head
      was triumphantly presented at the foot of the throne. On the reception of
      this welcome trophy, Basil instantly called for his bow, discharged three
      arrows with unerring aim, and accepted the applause of the court, who
      hailed the victory of the royal archer. With Chrysocheir, the glory of the
      Paulicians faded and withered: <a href="#Elink54note-20" id="Elink54noteref-20" name="Elink54noteref-20">20</a> on the second
      expedition of the emperor, the impregnable Tephrice, was deserted by the
      heretics, who sued for mercy or escaped to the borders. The city was
      ruined, but the spirit of independence survived in the mountains: the
      Paulicians defended, above a century, their religion and liberty, infested
      the Roman limits, and maintained their perpetual alliance with the enemies
      of the empire and the gospel.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-17" name="Elink54note-17">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      17 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-17">return</a>)<br/> [ Petrus Siculus, (p.
      763, 764,) the continuator of Theophanes, (l. iv. c. 4, p. 103, 104,)
      Cedrenus, (p. 541, 542, 545,) and Zonaras, (tom. ii. l. xvi. p. 156,)
      describe the revolt and exploits of Carbeas and his Paulicians.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-18" name="Elink54note-18">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      18 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-18">return</a>)<br/> [ Otter (Voyage en
      Turquie et en Perse, tom. ii.) is probably the only Frank who has visited
      the independent Barbarians of Tephrice now Divrigni, from whom he
      fortunately escaped in the train of a Turkish officer.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-19" name="Elink54note-19">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      19 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-19">return</a>)<br/> [ In the history of
      Chrysocheir, Genesius (Chron. p. 67-70, edit. Venet.) has exposed the
      nakedness of the empire. Constantine Porphyrogenitus (in Vit. Basil. c.
      37-43, p. 166-171) has displayed the glory of his grandfather. Cedrenus
      (p. 570-573) is without their passions or their knowledge.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-20" name="Elink54note-20">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      20 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-20">return</a>)<br/> [ How elegant is the
      Greek tongue, even in the mouth of Cedrenus!]
    </p>
<p>
      About the middle of the eight century, Constantine, surnamed Copronymus by
      the worshippers of images, had made an expedition into Armenia, and found,
      in the cities of Melitene and Theodosiopolis, a great number of
      Paulicians, his kindred heretics. As a favor, or punishment, he
      transplanted them from the banks of the Euphrates to Constantinople and
      Thrace; and by this emigration their doctrine was introduced and diffused
      in Europe. <a href="#Elink54note-21" id="Elink54noteref-21" name="Elink54noteref-21">21</a> If the sectaries of the metropolis were soon
      mingled with the promiscuous mass, those of the country struck a deep root
      in a foreign soil. The Paulicians of Thrace resisted the storms of
      persecution, maintained a secret correspondence with their Armenian
      brethren, and gave aid and comfort to their preachers, who solicited, not
      without success, the infant faith of the Bulgarians. <a href="#Elink54note-22" id="Elink54noteref-22" name="Elink54noteref-22">22</a>
      In the tenth century, they were restored and multiplied by a more powerful
      colony, which John Zimisces <a href="#Elink54note-23" id="Elink54noteref-23" name="Elink54noteref-23">23</a> transported from the
      Chalybian hills to the valleys of Mount Haemus. The Oriental clergy who
      would have preferred the destruction, impatiently sighed for the absence,
      of the Manichaeans: the warlike emperor had felt and esteemed their valor:
      their attachment to the Saracens was pregnant with mischief; but, on the
      side of the Danube, against the Barbarians of Scythia, their service might
      be useful, and their loss would be desirable. Their exile in a distant
      land was softened by a free toleration: the Paulicians held the city of
      Philippopolis and the keys of Thrace; the Catholics were their subjects;
      the Jacobite emigrants their associates: they occupied a line of villages
      and castles in Macedonia and Epirus; and many native Bulgarians were
      associated to the communion of arms and heresy. As long as they were awed
      by power and treated with moderation, their voluntary bands were
      distinguished in the armies of the empire; and the courage of these dogs,
      ever greedy of war, ever thirsty of human blood, is noticed with
      astonishment, and almost with reproach, by the pusillanimous Greeks. The
      same spirit rendered them arrogant and contumacious: they were easily
      provoked by caprice or injury; and their privileges were often violated by
      the faithless bigotry of the government and clergy. In the midst of the
      Norman war, two thousand five hundred Manichaeans deserted the standard of
      Alexius Comnenus, <a href="#Elink54note-24" id="Elink54noteref-24" name="Elink54noteref-24">24</a> and retired to their native homes. He
      dissembled till the moment of revenge; invited the chiefs to a friendly
      conference; and punished the innocent and guilty by imprisonment,
      confiscation, and baptism. In an interval of peace, the emperor undertook
      the pious office of reconciling them to the church and state: his winter
      quarters were fixed at Philippopolis; and the thirteenth apostle, as he is
      styled by his pious daughter, consumed whole days and nights in
      theological controversy. His arguments were fortified, their obstinacy was
      melted, by the honors and rewards which he bestowed on the most eminent
      proselytes; and a new city, surrounded with gardens, enriched with
      immunities, and dignified with his own name, was founded by Alexius for
      the residence of his vulgar converts. The important station of
      Philippopolis was wrested from their hands; the contumacious leaders were
      secured in a dungeon, or banished from their country; and their lives were
      spared by the prudence, rather than the mercy, of an emperor, at whose
      command a poor and solitary heretic was burnt alive before the church of
      St. Sophia. <a href="#Elink54note-25" id="Elink54noteref-25" name="Elink54noteref-25">25</a> But the proud hope of eradicating the
      prejudices of a nation was speedily overturned by the invincible zeal of
      the Paulicians, who ceased to dissemble or refused to obey. After the
      departure and death of Alexius, they soon resumed their civil and
      religious laws. In the beginning of the thirteenth century, their pope or
      primate (a manifest corruption) resided on the confines of Bulgaria,
      Croatia, and Dalmatia, and governed, by his vicars, the filial
      congregations of Italy and France. <a href="#Elink54note-26" id="Elink54noteref-26" name="Elink54noteref-26">26</a> From that aera, a
      minute scrutiny might prolong and perpetuate the chain of tradition. At
      the end of the last age, the sect or colony still inhabited the valleys of
      Mount Haemus, where their ignorance and proerty were more frequently
      tormented by the Greek clergy than by the Turkish government. The modern
      Paulicians have lost all memory of their origin; and their religion is
      disgraced by the worship of the cross, and the practice of bloody
      sacrifice, which some captives have imported from the wilds of Tartary. <a href="#Elink54note-27" id="Elink54noteref-27" name="Elink54noteref-27">27</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-21" name="Elink54note-21">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      21 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-21">return</a>)<br/> [ Copronymus transported
      his heretics; and thus says Cedrenus, (p. 463,) who has copied the annals
      of Theophanes.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-22" name="Elink54note-22">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      22 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-22">return</a>)<br/> [ Petrus Siculus, who
      resided nine months at Tephrice (A.D. 870) for the ransom of captives, (p.
      764,) was informed of their intended mission, and addressed his
      preservative, the Historia Manichaeorum to the new archbishop of the
      Bulgarians, (p. 754.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-23" name="Elink54note-23">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      23 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-23">return</a>)<br/> [ The colony of
      Paulicians and Jacobites transplanted by John Zimisces (A.D. 970) from
      Armenia to Thrace, is mentioned by Zonaras (tom. ii. l. xvii. p. 209) and
      Anna Comnena, (Alexiad, l. xiv. p. 450, &amp;c.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-24" name="Elink54note-24">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      24 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-24">return</a>)<br/> [ The Alexiad of Anna
      Comnena (l. v. p. 131, l. vi. p. 154, 155, l. xiv. p. 450-457, with the
      Annotations of Ducange) records the transactions of her apostolic father
      with the Manichaeans, whose abominable heresy she was desirous of
      refuting.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-25" name="Elink54note-25">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      25 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-25">return</a>)<br/> [ Basil, a monk, and the
      author of the Bogomiles, a sect of Gnostics, who soon vanished, (Anna
      Comnena, Alexiad, l. xv. p. 486-494 Mosheim, Hist. Ecclesiastica, p.
      420.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-26" name="Elink54note-26">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      26 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-26">return</a>)<br/> [ Matt. Paris, Hist.
      Major, p. 267. This passage of our English historian is alleged by Ducange
      in an excellent note on Villehardouin (No. 208,) who found the Paulicians
      at Philippopolis the friends of the Bulgarians.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-27" name="Elink54note-27">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      27 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-27">return</a>)<br/> [ See Marsigli, Stato
      Militare dell' Imperio Ottomano, p. 24.]
    </p>
<p>
      In the West, the first teachers of the Manichaean theology had been
      repulsed by the people, or suppressed by the prince. The favor and success
      of the Paulicians in the eleventh and twelfth centuries must be imputed to
      the strong, though secret, discontent which armed the most pious
      Christians against the church of Rome. Her avarice was oppressive, her
      despotism odious; less degenerate perhaps than the Greeks in the worship
      of saints and images, her innovations were more rapid and scandalous: she
      had rigorously defined and imposed the doctrine of transubstantiation: the
      lives of the Latin clergy were more corrupt, and the Eastern bishops might
      pass for the successors of the apostles, if they were compared with the
      lordly prelates, who wielded by turns the crosier, the sceptre, and the
      sword. Three different roads might introduce the Paulicians into the heart
      of Europe. After the conversion of Hungary, the pilgrims who visited
      Jerusalem might safely follow the course of the Danube: in their journey
      and return they passed through Philippopolis; and the sectaries,
      disguising their name and heresy, might accompany the French or German
      caravans to their respective countries. The trade and dominion of Venice
      pervaded the coast of the Adriatic, and the hospitable republic opened her
      bosom to foreigners of every climate and religion. Under the Byzantine
      standard, the Paulicians were often transported to the Greek provinces of
      Italy and Sicily: in peace and war, they freely conversed with strangers
      and natives, and their opinions were silently propagated in Rome, Milan,
      and the kingdoms beyond the Alps. <a href="#Elink54note-28" id="Elink54noteref-28" name="Elink54noteref-28">28</a> It was soon
      discovered, that many thousand Catholics of every rank, and of either sex,
      had embraced the Manichaean heresy; and the flames which consumed twelve
      canons of Orleans was the first act and signal of persecution. The
      Bulgarians, <a href="#Elink54note-29" id="Elink54noteref-29" name="Elink54noteref-29">29</a> a name so innocent in its origin, so odious
      in its application, spread their branches over the face of Europe. United
      in common hatred of idolatry and Rome, they were connected by a form of
      episcopal and presbyterian government; their various sects were
      discriminated by some fainter or darker shades of theology; but they
      generally agreed in the two principles, the contempt of the Old Testament
      and the denial of the body of Christ, either on the cross or in the
      eucharist. A confession of simple worship and blameless manners is
      extorted from their enemies; and so high was their standard of perfection,
      that the increasing congregations were divided into two classes of
      disciples, of those who practised, and of those who aspired. It was in the
      country of the Albigeois, <a href="#Elink54note-30" id="Elink54noteref-30" name="Elink54noteref-30">30</a> in the southern provinces of France, that the
      Paulicians were most deeply implanted; and the same vicissitudes of
      martyrdom and revenge which had been displayed in the neighborhood of the
      Euphrates, were repeated in the thirteenth century on the banks of the
      Rhone. The laws of the Eastern emperors were revived by Frederic the
      Second. The insurgents of Tephrice were represented by the barons and
      cities of Languedoc: Pope Innocent III. surpassed the sanguinary fame of
      Theodora. It was in cruelty alone that her soldiers could equal the heroes
      of the Crusades, and the cruelty of her priests was far excelled by the
      founders of the Inquisition; <a href="#Elink54note-31" id="Elink54noteref-31" name="Elink54noteref-31">31</a> an office more
      adapted to confirm, than to refute, the belief of an evil principle. The
      visible assemblies of the Paulicians, or Albigeois, were extirpated by
      fire and sword; and the bleeding remnant escaped by flight, concealment,
      or Catholic conformity. But the invincible spirit which they had kindled
      still lived and breathed in the Western world. In the state, in the
      church, and even in the cloister, a latent succession was preserved of the
      disciples of St. Paul; who protested against the tyranny of Rome, embraced
      the Bible as the rule of faith, and purified their creed from all the
      visions of the Gnostic theology. <a href="#Elink54note-3111" id="Elink54noteref-3111" name="Elink54noteref-3111">3111</a> The struggles
      of Wickliff in England, of Huss in Bohemia, were premature and
      ineffectual; but the names of Zuinglius, Luther, and Calvin, are
      pronounced with gratitude as the deliverers of nations.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-28" name="Elink54note-28">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      28 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-28">return</a>)<br/> [ The introduction of the
      Paulicians into Italy and France is amply discussed by Muratori
      (Antiquitat. Italiae Medii Aevi, tom. v. dissert. lx. p. 81-152) and
      Mosheim, (p. 379-382, 419-422.) Yet both have overlooked a curious passage
      of William the Apulian, who clearly describes them in a battle between the
      Greeks and Normans, A.D. 1040, (in Muratori, Script. Rerum Ital. tom. v.
      p. 256:)
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Cum Graecis aderant quidam, quos pessimus error

     Fecerat amentes, et ab ipso nomen habebant.
</pre>
<p class="foot">
      But he is so ignorant of their doctrine as to make them a kind of
      Sabellians or Patripassians.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-29" name="Elink54note-29">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      29 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-29">return</a>)<br/> [ Bulgari, Boulgres,
      Bougres, a national appellation, has been applied by the French as a term
      of reproach to usurers and unnatural sinners. The Paterini, or Patelini,
      has been made to signify a smooth and flattering hypocrite, such as
      l'Avocat Patelin of that original and pleasant farce, (Ducange, Gloss.
      Latinitat. Medii et Infimi Aevi.) The Manichaeans were likewise named
      Cathari or the pure, by corruption. Gazari, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-30" name="Elink54note-30">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      30 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-30">return</a>)<br/> [ Of the laws, crusade,
      and persecution against the Albigeois, a just, though general, idea is
      expressed by Mosheim, (p. 477-481.) The detail may be found in the
      ecclesiastical historians, ancient and modern, Catholics and Protestants;
      and amongst these Fleury is the most impartial and moderate.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-31" name="Elink54note-31">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      31 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-31">return</a>)<br/> [ The Acts (Liber
      Sententiarum) of the Inquisition of Tholouse (A.D. 1307-1323) have been
      published by Limborch, (Amstelodami, 1692,) with a previous History of the
      Inquisition in general. They deserved a more learned and critical editor.
      As we must not calumniate even Satan, or the Holy Office, I will observe,
      that of a list of criminals which fills nineteen folio pages, only fifteen
      men and four women were delivered to the secular arm.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-3111" name="Elink54note-3111">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3111 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-3111">return</a>)<br/> [ The popularity of
      "Milner's History of the Church" with some readers, may make it proper to
      observe, that his attempt to exculpate the Paulicians from the charge of
      Gnosticism or Manicheism is in direct defiance, if not in ignorance, of
      all the original authorities. Gibbon himself, it appears, was not
      acquainted with the work of Photius, "Contra Manicheos Repullulantes," the
      first book of which was edited by Montfaucon, Bibliotheca Coisliniana,
      pars ii. p. 349, 375, the whole by Wolf, in his Anecdota Graeca. Hamburg
      1722. Compare a very sensible tract. Letter to Rev. S. R. Maitland, by J
      G. Dowling, M. A. London, 1835.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      A philosopher, who calculates the degree of their merit and the value of
      their reformation, will prudently ask from what articles of faith, above
      or against our reason, they have enfranchised the Christians; for such
      enfranchisement is doubtless a benefit so far as it may be compatible with
      truth and piety. After a fair discussion, we shall rather be surprised by
      the timidity, than scandalized by the freedom, of our first reformers. <a href="#Elink54note-32" id="Elink54noteref-32" name="Elink54noteref-32">32</a>
      With the Jews, they adopted the belief and defence of all the Hebrew
      Scriptures, with all their prodigies, from the garden of Eden to the
      visions of the prophet Daniel; and they were bound, like the Catholics, to
      justify against the Jews the abolition of a divine law. In the great
      mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation the reformers were severely
      orthodox: they freely adopted the theology of the four, or the six first
      councils; and with the Athanasian creed, they pronounced the eternal
      damnation of all who did not believe the Catholic faith.
      Transubstantiation, the invisible change of the bread and wine into the
      body and blood of Christ, is a tenet that may defy the power of argument
      and pleasantry; but instead of consulting the evidence of their senses, of
      their sight, their feeling, and their taste, the first Protestants were
      entangled in their own scruples, and awed by the words of Jesus in the
      institution of the sacrament. Luther maintained a corporeal, and Calvin a
      real, presence of Christ in the eucharist; and the opinion of Zuinglius,
      that it is no more than a spiritual communion, a simple memorial, has
      slowly prevailed in the reformed churches. <a href="#Elink54note-33" id="Elink54noteref-33" name="Elink54noteref-33">33</a> But the loss of one
      mystery was amply compensated by the stupendous doctrines of original sin,
      redemption, faith, grace, and predestination, which have been strained
      from the epistles of St. Paul. These subtile questions had most assuredly
      been prepared by the fathers and schoolmen; but the final improvement and
      popular use may be attributed to the first reformers, who enforced them as
      the absolute and essential terms of salvation. Hitherto the weight of
      supernatural belief inclines against the Protestants; and many a sober
      Christian would rather admit that a wafer is God, than that God is a cruel
      and capricious tyrant.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-32" name="Elink54note-32">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      32 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-32">return</a>)<br/> [ The opinions and
      proceedings of the reformers are exposed in the second part of the general
      history of Mosheim; but the balance, which he has held with so clear an
      eye, and so steady a hand, begins to incline in favor of his Lutheran
      brethren.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-33" name="Elink54note-33">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      33 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-33">return</a>)<br/> [ Under Edward VI. our
      reformation was more bold and perfect, but in the fundamental articles of
      the church of England, a strong and explicit declaration against the real
      presence was obliterated in the original copy, to please the people or the
      Lutherans, or Queen Elizabeth, (Burnet's History of the Reformation, vol.
      ii. p. 82, 128, 302.)]
    </p>
<p>
      Yet the services of Luther and his rivals are solid and important; and the
      philosopher must own his obligations to these fearless enthusiasts. <a href="#Elink54note-34" id="Elink54noteref-34" name="Elink54noteref-34">34</a>
      I. By their hands the lofty fabric of superstition, from the abuse of
      indulgences to the intercesson of the Virgin, has been levelled with the
      ground. Myriads of both sexes of the monastic profession were restored to
      the liberty and labors of social life. A hierarchy of saints and angels,
      of imperfect and subordinate deities, were stripped of their temporal
      power, and reduced to the enjoyment of celestial happiness; their images
      and relics were banished from the church; and the credulity of the people
      was no longer nourished with the daily repetition of miracles and visions.
      The imitation of Paganism was supplied by a pure and spiritual worship of
      prayer and thanksgiving, the most worthy of man, the least unworthy of the
      Deity. It only remains to observe, whether such sublime simplicity be
      consistent with popular devotion; whether the vulgar, in the absence of
      all visible objects, will not be inflamed by enthusiasm, or insensibly
      subside in languor and indifference. II. The chain of authority was
      broken, which restrains the bigot from thinking as he pleases, and the
      slave from speaking as he thinks: the popes, fathers, and councils, were
      no longer the supreme and infallible judges of the world; and each
      Christian was taught to acknowledge no law but the Scriptures, no
      interpreter but his own conscience. This freedom, however, was the
      consequence, rather than the design, of the Reformation. The patriot
      reformers were ambitious of succeeding the tyrants whom they had
      dethroned. They imposed with equal rigor their creeds and confessions;
      they asserted the right of the magistrate to punish heretics with death.
      The pious or personal animosity of Calvin proscribed in Servetus <a href="#Elink54note-35" id="Elink54noteref-35" name="Elink54noteref-35">35</a>
      the guilt of his own rebellion; <a href="#Elink54note-36" id="Elink54noteref-36" name="Elink54noteref-36">36</a> and the flames of
      Smithfield, in which he was afterwards consumed, had been kindled for the
      Anabaptists by the zeal of Cranmer. <a href="#Elink54note-37" id="Elink54noteref-37" name="Elink54noteref-37">37</a> The nature of the
      tiger wa s the same, but he was gradually deprived of his teeth and fangs.
      A spiritual and temporal kingdom was possessed by the Roman pontiff; the
      Protestant doctors were subjects of an humble rank, without revenue or
      jurisdiction. His decrees were consecrated by the antiquity of the
      Catholic church: their arguments and disputes were submitted to the
      people; and their appeal to private judgment was accepted beyond their
      wishes, by curiosity and enthusiasm. Since the days of Luther and Calvin,
      a secret reformation has been silently working in the bosom of the
      reformed churches; many weeds of prejudice were eradicated; and the
      disciples of Erasmus <a href="#Elink54note-38" id="Elink54noteref-38" name="Elink54noteref-38">38</a> diffused a spirit of freedom and moderation.
      The liberty of conscience has been claimed as a common benefit, an
      inalienable right: <a href="#Elink54note-39" id="Elink54noteref-39" name="Elink54noteref-39">39</a> the free governments of Holland <a href="#Elink54note-40" id="Elink54noteref-40" name="Elink54noteref-40">40</a>
      and England <a href="#Elink54note-41" id="Elink54noteref-41" name="Elink54noteref-41">41</a> introduced the practice of toleration; and
      the narrow allowance of the laws has been enlarged by the prudence and
      humanity of the times. In the exercise, the mind has understood the limits
      of its powers, and the words and shadows that might amuse the child can no
      longer satisfy his manly reason. The volumes of controversy are overspread
      with cobwebs: the doctrine of a Protestant church is far removed from the
      knowledge or belief of its private members; and the forms of orthodoxy,
      the articles of faith, are subscribed with a sigh, or a smile, by the
      modern clergy. Yet the friends of Christianity are alarmed at the
      boundless impulse of inquiry and scepticism. The predictions of the
      Catholics are accomplished: the web of mystery is unravelled by the
      Arminians, Arians, and Socinians, whose number must not be computed from
      their separate congregations; and the pillars of Revelation are shaken by
      those men who preserve the name without the substance of religion, who
      indulge the license without the temper of philosophy. <a href="#Elink54note-42" id="Elink54noteref-42" name="Elink54noteref-42">42</a>
<a href="#Elink54note-4211" id="Elink54noteref-4211" name="Elink54noteref-4211">4211</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-34" name="Elink54note-34">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      34 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-34">return</a>)<br/> [ "Had it not been for
      such men as Luther and myself," said the fanatic Whiston to Halley the
      philosopher, "you would now be kneeling before an image of St. Winifred."]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-35" name="Elink54note-35">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      35 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-35">return</a>)<br/> [ The article of Servet
      in the Dictionnaire Critique of Chauffepie is the best account which I
      have seen of this shameful transaction. See likewise the Abbe d'Artigny,
      Nouveaux Memoires d'Histoire, &amp;c., tom. ii. p. 55-154.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-36" name="Elink54note-36">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      36 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-36">return</a>)<br/> [ I am more deeply
      scandalized at the single execution of Servetus, than at the hecatombs
      which have blazed in the Auto de Fes of Spain and Portugal. 1. The zeal of
      Calvin seems to have been envenomed by personal malice, and perhaps envy.
      He accused his adversary before their common enemies, the judges of
      Vienna, and betrayed, for his destruction, the sacred trust of a private
      correspondence. 2. The deed of cruelty was not varnished by the pretence
      of danger to the church or state. In his passage through Geneva, Servetus
      was a harmless stranger, who neither preached, nor printed, nor made
      proselytes. 3. A Catholic inquisition yields the same obedience which he
      requires, but Calvin violated the golden rule of doing as he would be done
      by; a rule which I read in a moral treatise of Isocrates (in Nicocle, tom.
      i. p. 93, edit. Battie) four hundred years before the publication of the
      Gospel. * Note: Gibbon has not accurately rendered the sense of this
      passage, which does not contain the maxim of charity Do unto others as you
      would they should do unto you, but simply the maxim of justice, Do not to
      others the which would offend you if they should do it to you.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-37" name="Elink54note-37">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      37 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-37">return</a>)<br/> [ See Burnet, vol. ii. p.
      84-86. The sense and humanity of the young king were oppressed by the
      authority of the primate.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-38" name="Elink54note-38">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      38 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-38">return</a>)<br/> [ Erasmus may be
      considered as the father of rational theology. After a slumber of a
      hundred years, it was revived by the Arminians of Holland, Grotius,
      Limborch, and Le Clerc; in England by Chillingworth, the latitudinarians
      of Cambridge, (Burnet, Hist. of Own Times, vol. i. p. 261-268, octavo
      edition.) Tillotson, Clarke, Hoadley, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-39" name="Elink54note-39">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      39 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-39">return</a>)<br/> [ I am sorry to observe,
      that the three writers of the last age, by whom the rights of toleration
      have been so nobly defended, Bayle, Leibnitz, and Locke, are all laymen
      and philosophers.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-40" name="Elink54note-40">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      40 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-40">return</a>)<br/> [ See the excellent
      chapter of Sir William Temple on the Religion of the United Provinces. I
      am not satisfied with Grotius, (de Rebus Belgicis, Annal. l. i. p. 13, 14,
      edit. in 12mo.,) who approves the Imperial laws of persecution, and only
      condemns the bloody tribunal of the inquisition.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-41" name="Elink54note-41">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      41 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-41">return</a>)<br/> [ Sir William Blackstone
      (Commentaries, vol. iv. p. 53, 54) explains the law of England as it was
      fixed at the Revolution. The exceptions of Papists, and of those who deny
      the Trinity, would still have a tolerable scope for persecution if the
      national spirit were not more effectual than a hundred statutes.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-42" name="Elink54note-42">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      42 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-42">return</a>)<br/> [ I shall recommend to
      public animadversion two passages in Dr. Priestley, which betray the
      ultimate tendency of his opinions. At the first of these (Hist. of the
      Corruptions of Christianity, vol. i. p. 275, 276) the priest, at the
      second (vol. ii. p. 484) the magistrate, may tremble!]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Elink54note-4211" name="Elink54note-4211">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4211 (<a href="#Elink54noteref-4211">return</a>)<br/> [ There is something
      ludicrous, if it were not offensive, in Gibbon holding up to "public
      animadversion" the opinions of any believer in Christianity, however
      imperfect his creed. The observations which the whole of this passage on
      the effects of the reformation, in which much truth and justice is mingled
      with much prejudice, would suggest, could not possibly be compressed into
      a note; and would indeed embrace the whole religious and irreligious
      history of the time which has elapsed since Gibbon wrote.—M.]
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
