<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     The Conduct Of The Roman Government Towards The Christians,
     From The Reign Of Nero To That Of Constantine. <a href="#Blinknote-1111" id="Blinknoteref-1111" name="Blinknoteref-1111">1111</a>
</pre>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1111" name="Blinknote-1111">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1111 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1111">return</a>)<br/> [ The sixteenth chapter
      I cannot help considering as a very ingenious and specious, but very
      disgraceful extenuation of the cruelties perpetrated by the Roman
      magistrates against the Christians. It is written in the most contemptibly
      factious spirit of prejudice against the sufferers; it is unworthy of a
      philosopher and of humanity. Let the narrative of Cyprian's death be
      examined. He had to relate the murder of an innocent man of advanced age,
      and in a station deemed venerable by a considerable body of the
      provincials of Africa, put to death because he refused to sacrifice to
      Jupiter. Instead of pointing the indignation of posterity against such an
      atrocious act of tyranny, he dwells, with visible art, on the small
      circumstances of decorum and politeness which attended this murder, and
      which he relates with as much parade as if they were the most important
      particulars of the event. Dr. Robertson has been the subject of much blame
      for his real or supposed lenity towards the Spanish murderers and tyrants
      in America. That the sixteenth chapter of Mr. G. did not excite the same
      or greater disapprobation, is a proof of the unphilosophical and indeed
      fanatical animosity against Christianity, which was so prevalent during
      the latter part of the eighteenth century.—Mackintosh: see Life, i.
      p. 244, 245.]
    </p>
<p>
      If we seriously consider the purity of the Christian religion, the
      sanctity of its moral precepts, and the innocent as well as austere lives
      of the greater number of those who during the first ages embraced the
      faith of the gospel, we should naturally suppose, that so benevolent a
      doctrine would have been received with due reverence, even by the
      unbelieving world; that the learned and the polite, however they may
      deride the miracles, would have esteemed the virtues, of the new sect; and
      that the magistrates, instead of persecuting, would have protected an
      order of men who yielded the most passive obedience to the laws, though
      they declined the active cares of war and government. If, on the other
      hand, we recollect the universal toleration of Polytheism, as it was
      invariably maintained by the faith of the people, the incredulity of
      philosophers, and the policy of the Roman senate and emperors, we are at a
      loss to discover what new offence the Christians had committed, what new
      provocation could exasperate the mild indifference of antiquity, and what
      new motives could urge the Roman princes, who beheld without concern a
      thousand forms of religion subsisting in peace under their gentle sway, to
      inflict a severe punishment on any part of their subjects, who had chosen
      for themselves a singular but an inoffensive mode of faith and worship.
    </p>
<p>
      The religious policy of the ancient world seems to have assumed a more
      stern and intolerant character, to oppose the progress of Christianity.
      About fourscore years after the death of Christ, his innocent disciples
      were punished with death by the sentence of a proconsul of the most
      amiable and philosophic character, and according to the laws of an emperor
      distinguished by the wisdom and justice of his general administration. The
      apologies which were repeatedly addressed to the successors of Trajan are
      filled with the most pathetic complaints, that the Christians, who obeyed
      the dictates, and solicited the liberty, of conscience, were alone, among
      all the subjects of the Roman empire, excluded from the common benefits of
      their auspicious government. The deaths of a few eminent martyrs have been
      recorded with care; and from the time that Christianity was invested with
      the supreme power, the governors of the church have been no less
      diligently employed in displaying the cruelty, than in imitating the
      conduct, of their Pagan adversaries. To separate (if it be possible) a few
      authentic as well as interesting facts from an undigested mass of fiction
      and error, and to relate, in a clear and rational manner, the causes, the
      extent, the duration, and the most important circumstances of the
      persecutions to which the first Christians were exposed, is the design of
      the present chapter. <a href="#Blinknote-1222" id="Blinknoteref-1222" name="Blinknoteref-1222">1222</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1222" name="Blinknote-1222">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1222 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1222">return</a>)<br/> [ The history of the
      first age of Christianity is only found in the Acts of the Apostles, and
      in order to speak of the first persecutions experienced by the Christians,
      that book should naturally have been consulted; those persecutions, then
      limited to individuals and to a narrow sphere, interested only the
      persecuted, and have been related by them alone. Gibbon making the
      persecutions ascend no higher than Nero, has entirely omitted those which
      preceded this epoch, and of which St. Luke has preserved the memory. The
      only way to justify this omission was, to attack the authenticity of the
      Acts of the Apostles; for, if authentic, they must necessarily be
      consulted and quoted. Now, antiquity has left very few works of which the
      authenticity is so well established as that of the Acts of the Apostles.
      (See Lardner's Cred. of Gospel Hist. part iii.) It is therefore, without
      sufficient reason, that Gibbon has maintained silence concerning the
      narrative of St. Luke, and this omission is not without importance.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      The sectaries of a persecuted religion, depressed by fear animated with
      resentment, and perhaps heated by enthusiasm, are seldom in a proper
      temper of mind calmly to investigate, or candidly to appreciate, the
      motives of their enemies, which often escape the impartial and discerning
      view even of those who are placed at a secure distance from the flames of
      persecution. A reason has been assigned for the conduct of the emperors
      towards the primitive Christians, which may appear the more specious and
      probable as it is drawn from the acknowledged genius of Polytheism. It has
      already been observed, that the religious concord of the world was
      principally supported by the implicit assent and reverence which the
      nations of antiquity expressed for their respective traditions and
      ceremonies. It might therefore be expected, that they would unite with
      indignation against any sect or people which should separate itself from
      the communion of mankind, and claiming the exclusive possession of divine
      knowledge, should disdain every form of worship, except its own, as
      impious and idolatrous. The rights of toleration were held by mutual
      indulgence: they were justly forfeited by a refusal of the accustomed
      tribute. As the payment of this tribute was inflexibly refused by the
      Jews, and by them alone, the consideration of the treatment which they
      experienced from the Roman magistrates, will serve to explain how far
      these speculations are justified by facts, and will lead us to discover
      the true causes of the persecution of Christianity.
    </p>
<p>
      Without repeating what has already been mentioned of the reverence of the
      Roman princes and governors for the temple of Jerusalem, we shall only
      observe, that the destruction of the temple and city was accompanied and
      followed by every circumstance that could exasperate the minds of the
      conquerors, and authorize religious persecution by the most specious
      arguments of political justice and the public safety. From the reign of
      Nero to that of Antoninus Pius, the Jews discovered a fierce impatience of
      the dominion of Rome, which repeatedly broke out in the most furious
      massacres and insurrections. Humanity is shocked at the recital of the
      horrid cruelties which they committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus,
      and of Cyrene, where they dwelt in treacherous friendship with the
      unsuspecting natives; <a href="#Blinknote-1" id="Blinknoteref-1" name="Blinknoteref-1">1</a> and we are tempted to applaud the severe
      retaliation which was exercised by the arms of the legions against a race
      of fanatics, whose dire and credulous superstition seemed to render them
      the implacable enemies not only of the Roman government, but of human
      kind. <a href="#Blinknote-2" id="Blinknoteref-2" name="Blinknoteref-2">2</a>
      The enthusiasm of the Jews was supported by the opinion, that it was
      unlawful for them to pay taxes to an idolatrous master; and by the
      flattering promise which they derived from their ancient oracles, that a
      conquering Messiah would soon arise, destined to break their fetters, and
      to invest the favorites of heaven with the empire of the earth. It was by
      announcing himself as their long-expected deliverer, and by calling on all
      the descendants of Abraham to assert the hope of Israel, that the famous
      Barchochebas collected a formidable army, with which he resisted during
      two years the power of the emperor Hadrian. <a href="#Blinknote-3" id="Blinknoteref-3" name="Blinknoteref-3">3</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1" name="Blinknote-1">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1">return</a>)<br/> [ In Cyrene, they massacred
      220,000 Greeks; in Cyprus, 240,000; in Egypt, a very great multitude. Many
      of these unhappy victims were sawn asunder, according to a precedent to
      which David had given the sanction of his example. The victorious Jews
      devoured the flesh, licked up the blood, and twisted the entrails like a
      girdle round their bodies. See Dion Cassius, l. lxviii. p. 1145. * Note:
      Some commentators, among them Reimar, in his notes on Dion Cassius think
      that the hatred of the Romans against the Jews has led the historian to
      exaggerate the cruelties committed by the latter. Don. Cass. lxviii. p.
      1146.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-2" name="Blinknote-2">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      2 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-2">return</a>)<br/> [ Without repeating the
      well-known narratives of Josephus, we may learn from Dion, (l. lxix. p.
      1162,) that in Hadrian's war 580,000 Jews were cut off by the sword,
      besides an infinite number which perished by famine, by disease, and by
      fire.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-3" name="Blinknote-3">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-3">return</a>)<br/> [ For the sect of the
      Zealots, see Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. i. c. 17; for the characters
      of the Messiah, according to the Rabbis, l. v. c. 11, 12, 13; for the
      actions of Barchochebas, l. vii. c. 12. (Hist. of Jews iii. 115, &amp;c.)—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      Notwithstanding these repeated provocations, the resentment of the Roman
      princes expired after the victory; nor were their apprehensions continued
      beyond the period of war and danger. By the general indulgence of
      polytheism, and by the mild temper of Antoninus Pius, the Jews were
      restored to their ancient privileges, and once more obtained the
      permission of circumcising their children, with the easy restraint, that
      they should never confer on any foreign proselyte that distinguishing mark
      of the Hebrew race. <a href="#Blinknote-4" id="Blinknoteref-4" name="Blinknoteref-4">4</a> The numerous remains of that people, though they
      were still excluded from the precincts of Jerusalem, were permitted to
      form and to maintain considerable establishments both in Italy and in the
      provinces, to acquire the freedom of Rome, to enjoy municipal honors, and
      to obtain at the same time an exemption from the burdensome and expensive
      offices of society. The moderation or the contempt of the Romans gave a
      legal sanction to the form of ecclesiastical police which was instituted
      by the vanquished sect. The patriarch, who had fixed his residence at
      Tiberias, was empowered to appoint his subordinate ministers and apostles,
      to exercise a domestic jurisdiction, and to receive from his dispersed
      brethren an annual contribution. <a href="#Blinknote-5" id="Blinknoteref-5" name="Blinknoteref-5">5</a> New synagogues were frequently erected in the
      principal cities of the empire; and the sabbaths, the fasts, and the
      festivals, which were either commanded by the Mosaic law, or enjoined by
      the traditions of the Rabbis, were celebrated in the most solemn and
      public manner. <a href="#Blinknote-6" id="Blinknoteref-6" name="Blinknoteref-6">6</a> Such gentle treatment insensibly assuaged the
      stern temper of the Jews. Awakened from their dream of prophecy and
      conquest, they assumed the behavior of peaceable and industrious subjects.
      Their irreconcilable hatred of mankind, instead of flaming out in acts of
      blood and violence, evaporated in less dangerous gratifications. They
      embraced every opportunity of overreaching the idolaters in trade; and
      they pronounced secret and ambiguous imprecations against the haughty
      kingdom of Edom. <a href="#Blinknote-7" id="Blinknoteref-7" name="Blinknoteref-7">7</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-4" name="Blinknote-4">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-4">return</a>)<br/> [ It is to Modestinus, a
      Roman lawyer (l. vi. regular.) that we are indebted for a distinct
      knowledge of the Edict of Antoninus. See Casaubon ad Hist. August. p. 27.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-5" name="Blinknote-5">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-5">return</a>)<br/> [ See Basnage, Histoire des
      Juifs, l. iii. c. 2, 3. The office of Patriarch was suppressed by
      Theodosius the younger.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-6" name="Blinknote-6">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-6">return</a>)<br/> [ We need only mention the
      Purim, or deliverance of the Jews from he rage of Haman, which, till the
      reign of Theodosius, was celebrated with insolent triumph and riotous
      intemperance. Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, l. vi. c. 17, l. viii. c. 6.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-7" name="Blinknote-7">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      7 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-7">return</a>)<br/> [ According to the false
      Josephus, Tsepho, the grandson of Esau, conducted into Italy the army of
      Eneas, king of Carthage. Another colony of Idumaeans, flying from the
      sword of David, took refuge in the dominions of Romulus. For these, or for
      other reasons of equal weight, the name of Edom was applied by the Jews to
      the Roman empire. * Note: The false Josephus is a romancer of very modern
      date, though some of these legends are probably more ancient. It may be
      worth considering whether many of the stories in the Talmud are not
      history in a figurative disguise, adopted from prudence. The Jews might
      dare to say many things of Rome, under the significant appellation of
      Edom, which they feared to utter publicly. Later and more ignorant ages
      took literally, and perhaps embellished, what was intelligible among the
      generation to which it was addressed. Hist. of Jews, iii. 131. ——The
      false Josephus has the inauguration of the emperor, with the seven
      electors and apparently the pope assisting at the coronation! Pref. page
      xxvi.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      Since the Jews, who rejected with abhorrence the deities adored by their
      sovereign and by their fellow-subjects, enjoyed, however, the free
      exercise of their unsocial religion, there must have existed some other
      cause, which exposed the disciples of Christ to those severities from
      which the posterity of Abraham was exempt. The difference between them is
      simple and obvious; but, according to the sentiments of antiquity, it was
      of the highest importance. The Jews were a nation; the Christians were a
      sect: and if it was natural for every community to respect the sacred
      institutions of their neighbors, it was incumbent on them to persevere in
      those of their ancestors. The voice of oracles, the precepts of
      philosophers, and the authority of the laws, unanimously enforced this
      national obligation. By their lofty claim of superior sanctity the Jews
      might provoke the Polytheists to consider them as an odious and impure
      race. By disdaining the intercourse of other nations, they might deserve
      their contempt. The laws of Moses might be for the most part frivolous or
      absurd; yet, since they had been received during many ages by a large
      society, his followers were justified by the example of mankind; and it
      was universally acknowledged, that they had a right to practise what it
      would have been criminal in them to neglect. But this principle, which
      protected the Jewish synagogue, afforded not any favor or security to the
      primitive church. By embracing the faith of the gospel, the Christians
      incurred the supposed guilt of an unnatural and unpardonable offence. They
      dissolved the sacred ties of custom and education, violated the religious
      institutions of their country, and presumptuously despised whatever their
      fathers had believed as true, or had reverenced as sacred. Nor was this
      apostasy (if we may use the expression) merely of a partial or local kind;
      since the pious deserter who withdrew himself from the temples of Egypt or
      Syria, would equally disdain to seek an asylum in those of Athens or
      Carthage. Every Christian rejected with contempt the superstitions of his
      family, his city, and his province. The whole body of Christians
      unanimously refused to hold any communion with the gods of Rome, of the
      empire, and of mankind. It was in vain that the oppressed believer
      asserted the inalienable rights of conscience and private judgment. Though
      his situation might excite the pity, his arguments could never reach the
      understanding, either of the philosophic or of the believing part of the
      Pagan world. To their apprehensions, it was no less a matter of surprise,
      that any individuals should entertain scruples against complying with the
      established mode of worship, than if they had conceived a sudden
      abhorrence to the manners, the dress, <a href="#Blinknote-8111" id="Blinknoteref-8111" name="Blinknoteref-8111">8111</a> or the language of
      their native country. <a href="#Blinknote-8" id="Blinknoteref-8" name="Blinknoteref-8">8</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-8" name="Blinknote-8">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-8">return</a>)<br/> [ From the arguments of
      Celsus, as they are represented and refuted by Origen, (l. v. p. 247—259,)
      we may clearly discover the distinction that was made between the Jewish
      people and the Christian sect. See, in the Dialogue of Minucius Felix, (c.
      5, 6,) a fair and not inelegant description of the popular sentiments,
      with regard to the desertion of the established worship.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-8111" name="Blinknote-8111">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8111 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-8111">return</a>)<br/> [ In all this there is
      doubtless much truth; yet does not the more important difference lie on
      the surface? The Christians made many converts the Jews but few. Had the
      Jewish been equally a proselyting religion would it not have encountered
      as violent persecution?—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The surprise of the Pagans was soon succeeded by resentment; and the most
      pious of men were exposed to the unjust but dangerous imputation of
      impiety. Malice and prejudice concurred in representing the Christians as
      a society of atheists, who, by the most daring attack on the religious
      constitution of the empire, had merited the severest animadversion of the
      civil magistrate. They had separated themselves (they gloried in the
      confession) from every mode of superstition which was received in any part
      of the globe by the various temper of polytheism: but it was not
      altogether so evident what deity, or what form of worship, they had
      substituted to the gods and temples of antiquity. The pure and sublime
      idea which they entertained of the Supreme Being escaped the gross
      conception of the Pagan multitude, who were at a loss to discover a
      spiritual and solitary God, that was neither represented under any
      corporeal figure or visible symbol, nor was adored with the accustomed
      pomp of libations and festivals, of altars and sacrifices. <a href="#Blinknote-9" id="Blinknoteref-9" name="Blinknoteref-9">9</a> The sages
      of Greece and Rome, who had elevated their minds to the contemplation of
      the existence and attributes of the First Cause, were induced by reason or
      by vanity to reserve for themselves and their chosen disciples the
      privilege of this philosophical devotion. <a href="#Blinknote-10" id="Blinknoteref-10" name="Blinknoteref-10">10</a> They were far from
      admitting the prejudices of mankind as the standard of truth, but they
      considered them as flowing from the original disposition of human nature;
      and they supposed that any popular mode of faith and worship which
      presumed to disclaim the assistance of the senses, would, in proportion as
      it receded from superstition, find itself incapable of restraining the
      wanderings of the fancy, and the visions of fanaticism. The careless
      glance which men of wit and learning condescended to cast on the Christian
      revelation, served only to confirm their hasty opinion, and to persuade
      them that the principle, which they might have revered, of the Divine
      Unity, was defaced by the wild enthusiasm, and annihilated by the airy
      speculations, of the new sectaries. The author of a celebrated dialogue,
      which has been attributed to Lucian, whilst he affects to treat the
      mysterious subject of the Trinity in a style of ridicule and contempt,
      betrays his own ignorance of the weakness of human reason, and of the
      inscrutable nature of the divine perfections. <a href="#Blinknote-11" id="Blinknoteref-11" name="Blinknoteref-11">11</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-9" name="Blinknote-9">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      9 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-9">return</a>)<br/> [ Cœur nullas aras habent?
      templa nulla? nulla nota simulacra!—Unde autem, vel quis ille, aut
      ubi, Deus unicus, solitarius, desti tutus? Minucius Felix, c. 10. The
      Pagan interlocutor goes on to make a distinction in favor of the Jews, who
      had once a temple, altars, victims, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-10" name="Blinknote-10">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      10 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-10">return</a>)<br/> [ It is difficult (says
      Plato) to attain, and dangerous to publish, the knowledge of the true God.
      See the Theologie des Philosophes, in the Abbe d'Olivet's French
      translation of Tully de Natura Deorum, tom. i. p. 275.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-11" name="Blinknote-11">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      11 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-11">return</a>)<br/> [ The author of the
      Philopatris perpetually treats the Christians as a company of dreaming
      enthusiasts, &amp;c.; and in one place he manifestly alludes to the vision
      in which St. Paul was transported to the third heaven. In another place,
      Triephon, who personates a Christian, after deriding the gods of Paganism,
      proposes a mysterious oath.]
    </p>
<p>
      It might appear less surprising, that the founder of Christianity should
      not only be revered by his disciples as a sage and a prophet, but that he
      should be adored as a God. The Polytheists were disposed to adopt every
      article of faith, which seemed to offer any resemblance, however distant
      or imperfect, with the popular mythology; and the legends of Bacchus, of
      Hercules, and of Aesculapius, had, in some measure, prepared their
      imagination for the appearance of the Son of God under a human form. <a href="#Blinknote-12" id="Blinknoteref-12" name="Blinknoteref-12">12</a> But
      they were astonished that the Christians should abandon the temples of
      those ancient heroes, who, in the infancy of the world, had invented arts,
      instituted laws, and vanquished the tyrants or monsters who infested the
      earth, in order to choose for the exclusive object of their religious
      worship an obscure teacher, who, in a recent age, and among a barbarous
      people, had fallen a sacrifice either to the malice of his own countrymen,
      or to the jealousy of the Roman government. The Pagan multitude, reserving
      their gratitude for temporal benefits alone, rejected the inestimable
      present of life and immortality, which was offered to mankind by Jesus of
      Nazareth. His mild constancy in the midst of cruel and voluntary
      sufferings, his universal benevolence, and the sublime simplicity of his
      actions and character, were insufficient, in the opinion of those carnal
      men, to compensate for the want of fame, of empire, and of success; and
      whilst they refused to acknowledge his stupendous triumph over the powers
      of darkness and of the grave, they misrepresented, or they insulted, the
      equivocal birth, wandering life, and ignominious death, of the divine
      Author of Christianity. <a href="#Blinknote-13" id="Blinknoteref-13" name="Blinknoteref-13">13</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-12" name="Blinknote-12">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      12 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-12">return</a>)<br/> [ According to Justin
      Martyr, (Apolog. Major, c. 70-85,) the daemon who had gained some
      imperfect knowledge of the prophecies, purposely contrived this
      resemblance, which might deter, though by different means, both the people
      and the philosophers from embracing the faith of Christ.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-13" name="Blinknote-13">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      13 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-13">return</a>)<br/> [ In the first and second
      books of Origen, Celsus treats the birth and character of our Savior with
      the most impious contempt. The orator Libanius praises Porphyry and Julian
      for confuting the folly of a sect., which styles a dead man of Palestine,
      God, and the Son of God. Socrates, Hist. Ecclesiast. iii. 23.]
    </p>
<p>
      The personal guilt which every Christian had contracted, in thus
      preferring his private sentiment to the national religion, was aggravated
      in a very high degree by the number and union of the criminals. It is well
      known, and has been already observed, that Roman policy viewed with the
      utmost jealousy and distrust any association among its subjects; and that
      the privileges of private corporations, though formed for the most
      harmless or beneficial purposes, were bestowed with a very sparing hand.
      <a href="#Blinknote-14" id="Blinknoteref-14" name="Blinknoteref-14">14</a>
      The religious assemblies of the Christians who had separated themselves
      from the public worship, appeared of a much less innocent nature; they
      were illegal in their principle, and in their consequences might become
      dangerous; nor were the emperors conscious that they violated the laws of
      justice, when, for the peace of society, they prohibited those secret and
      sometimes nocturnal meetings. <a href="#Blinknote-15" id="Blinknoteref-15" name="Blinknoteref-15">15</a> The pious disobedience of the Christians made
      their conduct, or perhaps their designs, appear in a much more serious and
      criminal light; and the Roman princes, who might perhaps have suffered
      themselves to be disarmed by a ready submission, deeming their honor
      concerned in the execution of their commands, sometimes attempted, by
      rigorous punishments, to subdue this independent spirit, which boldly
      acknowledged an authority superior to that of the magistrate. The extent
      and duration of this spiritual conspiracy seemed to render it everyday
      more deserving of his animadversion. We have already seen that the active
      and successful zeal of the Christians had insensibly diffused them through
      every province and almost every city of the empire. The new converts
      seemed to renounce their family and country, that they might connect
      themselves in an indissoluble band of union with a peculiar society, which
      every where assumed a different character from the rest of mankind. Their
      gloomy and austere aspect, their abhorrence of the common business and
      pleasures of life, and their frequent predictions of impending calamities,
      <a href="#Blinknote-16" id="Blinknoteref-16" name="Blinknoteref-16">16</a>
      inspired the Pagans with the apprehension of some danger, which would
      arise from the new sect, the more alarming as it was the more obscure.
      "Whatever," says Pliny, "may be the principle of their conduct, their
      inflexible obstinacy appeared deserving of punishment." <a href="#Blinknote-17" id="Blinknoteref-17" name="Blinknoteref-17">17</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-14" name="Blinknote-14">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      14 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-14">return</a>)<br/> [ The emperor Trajan
      refused to incorporate a company of 150 firemen, for the use of the city
      of Nicomedia. He disliked all associations. See Plin. Epist. x. 42, 43.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-15" name="Blinknote-15">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      15 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-15">return</a>)<br/> [ The proconsul Pliny had
      published a general edict against unlawful meetings. The prudence of the
      Christians suspended their Agapae; but it was impossible for them to omit
      the exercise of public worship.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-16" name="Blinknote-16">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      16 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-16">return</a>)<br/> [ As the prophecies of the
      Antichrist, approaching conflagration, &amp;c., provoked those Pagans whom
      they did not convert, they were mentioned with caution and reserve; and
      the Montanists were censured for disclosing too freely the dangerous
      secret. See Mosheim, 413.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-17" name="Blinknote-17">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      17 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-17">return</a>)<br/> [ Neque enim dubitabam,
      quodcunque esset quod faterentur, (such are the words of Pliny,)
      pervicacian certe et inflexibilem obstinationem lebere puniri.]
    </p>
<p>
      The precautions with which the disciples of Christ performed the offices
      of religion were at first dictated by fear and necessity; but they were
      continued from choice. By imitating the awful secrecy which reigned in the
      Eleusinian mysteries, the Christians had flattered themselves that they
      should render their sacred institutions more respectable in the eyes of
      the Pagan world. <a href="#Blinknote-18" id="Blinknoteref-18" name="Blinknoteref-18">18</a> But the event, as it often happens to the
      operations of subtile policy, deceived their wishes and their
      expectations. It was concluded, that they only concealed what they would
      have blushed to disclose. Their mistaken prudence afforded an opportunity
      for malice to invent, and for suspicious credulity to believe, the horrid
      tales which described the Christians as the most wicked of human kind, who
      practised in their dark recesses every abomination that a depraved fancy
      could suggest, and who solicited the favor of their unknown God by the
      sacrifice of every moral virtue. There were many who pretended to confess
      or to relate the ceremonies of this abhorred society. It was asserted,
      "that a new-born infant, entirely covered over with flour, was presented,
      like some mystic symbol of initiation, to the knife of the proselyte, who
      unknowingly inflicted many a secret and mortal wound on the innocent
      victim of his error; that as soon as the cruel deed was perpetrated, the
      sectaries drank up the blood, greedily tore asunder the quivering members,
      and pledged themselves to eternal secrecy, by a mutual consciousness of
      guilt. It was as confidently affirmed, that this inhuman sacrifice was
      succeeded by a suitable entertainment, in which intemperance served as a
      provocative to brutal lust; till, at the appointed moment, the lights were
      suddenly extinguished, shame was banished, nature was forgotten; and, as
      accident might direct, the darkness of the night was polluted by the
      incestuous commerce of sisters and brothers, of sons and of mothers." <a href="#Blinknote-19" id="Blinknoteref-19" name="Blinknoteref-19">19</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-18" name="Blinknote-18">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      18 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-18">return</a>)<br/> [ See Mosheim's
      Ecclesiastical History, vol. i. p. 101, and Spanheim, Remarques sur les
      Caesars de Julien, p. 468, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-19" name="Blinknote-19">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      19 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-19">return</a>)<br/> [ See Justin Martyr,
      Apolog. i. 35, ii. 14. Athenagoras, in Legation, c. 27. Tertullian,
      Apolog. c. 7, 8, 9. Minucius Felix, c. 9, 10, 80, 31. The last of these
      writers relates the accusation in the most elegant and circumstantial
      manner. The answer of Tertullian is the boldest and most vigorous.]
    </p>
<p>
      But the perusal of the ancient apologies was sufficient to remove even the
      slightest suspicion from the mind of a candid adversary. The Christians,
      with the intrepid security of innocence, appeal from the voice of rumor to
      the equity of the magistrates. They acknowledge, that if any proof can be
      produced of the crimes which calumny has imputed to them, they are worthy
      of the most severe punishment. They provoke the punishment, and they
      challenge the proof. At the same time they urge, with equal truth and
      propriety, that the charge is not less devoid of probability, than it is
      destitute of evidence; they ask, whether any one can seriously believe
      that the pure and holy precepts of the gospel, which so frequently
      restrain the use of the most lawful enjoyments, should inculcate the
      practice of the most abominable crimes; that a large society should
      resolve to dishonor itself in the eyes of its own members; and that a
      great number of persons of either sex, and every age and character,
      insensible to the fear of death or infamy, should consent to violate those
      principles which nature and education had imprinted most deeply in their
      minds. <a href="#Blinknote-20" id="Blinknoteref-20" name="Blinknoteref-20">20</a>
      Nothing, it should seem, could weaken the force or destroy the effect of
      so unanswerable a justification, unless it were the injudicious conduct of
      the apologists themselves, who betrayed the common cause of religion, to
      gratify their devout hatred to the domestic enemies of the church. It was
      sometimes faintly insinuated, and sometimes boldly asserted, that the same
      bloody sacrifices, and the same incestuous festivals, which were so
      falsely ascribed to the orthodox believers, were in reality celebrated by
      the Marcionites, by the Carpocratians, and by several other sects of the
      Gnostics, who, notwithstanding they might deviate into the paths of
      heresy, were still actuated by the sentiments of men, and still governed
      by the precepts of Christianity. <a href="#Blinknote-21" id="Blinknoteref-21" name="Blinknoteref-21">21</a> Accusations of a similar
      kind were retorted upon the church by the schismatics who had departed
      from its communion, <a href="#Blinknote-22" id="Blinknoteref-22" name="Blinknoteref-22">22</a> and it was confessed on all sides, that the
      most scandalous licentiousness of manners prevailed among great numbers of
      those who affected the name of Christians. A Pagan magistrate, who
      possessed neither leisure nor abilities to discern the almost
      imperceptible line which divides the orthodox faith from heretical
      pravity, might easily have imagined that their mutual animosity had
      extorted the discovery of their common guilt. It was fortunate for the
      repose, or at least for the reputation, of the first Christians, that the
      magistrates sometimes proceeded with more temper and moderation than is
      usually consistent with religious zeal, and that they reported, as the
      impartial result of their judicial inquiry, that the sectaries, who had
      deserted the established worship, appeared to them sincere in their
      professions, and blameless in their manners; however they might incur, by
      their absurd and excessive superstition, the censure of the laws. <a href="#Blinknote-23" id="Blinknoteref-23" name="Blinknoteref-23">23</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-20" name="Blinknote-20">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      20 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-20">return</a>)<br/> [ In the persecution of
      Lyons, some Gentile slaves were compelled, by the fear of tortures, to
      accuse their Christian master. The church of Lyons, writing to their
      brethren of Asia, treat the horrid charge with proper indignation and
      contempt. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. v. i.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-21" name="Blinknote-21">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      21 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-21">return</a>)<br/> [ See Justin Martyr,
      Apolog. i. 35. Irenaeus adv. Haeres. i. 24. Clemens. Alexandrin. Stromat.
      l. iii. p. 438. Euseb. iv. 8. It would be tedious and disgusting to relate
      all that the succeeding writers have imagined, all that Epiphanius has
      received, and all that Tillemont has copied. M. de Beausobre (Hist. du
      Manicheisme, l. ix. c. 8, 9) has exposed, with great spirit, the
      disingenuous arts of Augustin and Pope Leo I.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-22" name="Blinknote-22">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      22 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-22">return</a>)<br/> [ When Tertullian became a
      Montanist, he aspersed the morals of the church which he had so resolutely
      defended. "Sed majoris est Agape, quia per hanc adolescentes tui cum
      sororibus dormiunt, appendices scilicet gulae lascivia et luxuria." De
      Jejuniis c. 17. The 85th canon of the council of Illiberis provides
      against the scandals which too often polluted the vigils of the church,
      and disgraced the Christian name in the eyes of unbelievers.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-23" name="Blinknote-23">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      23 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-23">return</a>)<br/> [ Tertullian (Apolog. c. 2)
      expatiates on the fair and honorable testimony of Pliny, with much reason
      and some declamation.]
    </p>
<p>
      History, which undertakes to record the transactions of the past, for the
      instruction of future ages, would ill deserve that honorable office, if
      she condescended to plead the cause of tyrants, or to justify the maxims
      of persecution. It must, however, be acknowledged, that the conduct of the
      emperors who appeared the least favorable to the primitive church, is by
      no means so criminal as that of modern sovereigns, who have employed the
      arm of violence and terror against the religious opinions of any part of
      their subjects. From their reflections, or even from their own feelings, a
      Charles V. or a Lewis XIV. might have acquired a just knowledge of the
      rights of conscience, of the obligation of faith, and of the innocence of
      error. But the princes and magistrates of ancient Rome were strangers to
      those principles which inspired and authorized the inflexible obstinacy of
      the Christians in the cause of truth, nor could they themselves discover
      in their own breasts any motive which would have prompted them to refuse a
      legal, and as it were a natural, submission to the sacred institutions of
      their country. The same reason which contributes to alleviate the guilt,
      must have tended to abate the vigor, of their persecutions. As they were
      actuated, not by the furious zeal of bigots, but by the temperate policy
      of legislators, contempt must often have relaxed, and humanity must
      frequently have suspended, the execution of those laws which they enacted
      against the humble and obscure followers of Christ. From the general view
      of their character and motives we might naturally conclude: I. That a
      considerable time elapsed before they considered the new sectaries as an
      object deserving of the attention of government. II. That in the
      conviction of any of their subjects who were accused of so very singular a
      crime, they proceeded with caution and reluctance. III. That they were
      moderate in the use of punishments; and, IV. That the afflicted church
      enjoyed many intervals of peace and tranquility. Notwithstanding the
      careless indifference which the most copious and the most minute of the
      Pagan writers have shown to the affairs of the Christians, <a href="#Blinknote-24" id="Blinknoteref-24" name="Blinknoteref-24">24</a> it
      may still be in our power to confirm each of these probable suppositions,
      by the evidence of authentic facts.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-24" name="Blinknote-24">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      24 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-24">return</a>)<br/> [ In the various
      compilation of the Augustan History, (a part of which was composed under
      the reign of Constantine,) there are not six lines which relate to the
      Christians; nor has the diligence of Xiphilin discovered their name in the
      large history of Dion Cassius. * Note: The greater part of the Augustan
      History is dedicated to Diocletian. This may account for the silence of
      its authors concerning Christianity. The notices that occur are almost all
      in the lives composed under the reign of Constantine. It may fairly be
      concluded, from the language which he had into the mouth of Maecenas, that
      Dion was an enemy to all innovations in religion. (See Gibbon, infra, note
      105.) In fact, when the silence of Pagan historians is noticed, it should
      be remembered how meagre and mutilated are all the extant histories of the
      period—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      1. By the wise dispensation of Providence, a mysterious veil was cast over
      the infancy of the church, which, till the faith of the Christians was
      matured, and their numbers were multiplied, served to protect them not
      only from the malice but even from the knowledge of the Pagan world. The
      slow and gradual abolition of the Mosaic ceremonies afforded a safe and
      innocent disguise to the more early proselytes of the gospel. As they
      were, for the greater part, of the race of Abraham, they were
      distinguished by the peculiar mark of circumcision, offered up their
      devotions in the Temple of Jerusalem till its final destruction, and
      received both the Law and the Prophets as the genuine inspirations of the
      Deity. The Gentile converts, who by a spiritual adoption had been
      associated to the hope of Israel, were likewise confounded under the garb
      and appearance of Jews, <a href="#Blinknote-25" id="Blinknoteref-25" name="Blinknoteref-25">25</a> and as the Polytheists paid less regard to
      articles of faith than to the external worship, the new sect, which
      carefully concealed, or faintly announced, its future greatness and
      ambition, was permitted to shelter itself under the general toleration
      which was granted to an ancient and celebrated people in the Roman empire.
      It was not long, perhaps, before the Jews themselves, animated with a
      fiercer zeal and a more jealous faith, perceived the gradual separation of
      their Nazarene brethren from the doctrine of the synagogue; and they would
      gladly have extinguished the dangerous heresy in the blood of its
      adherents. But the decrees of Heaven had already disarmed their malice;
      and though they might sometimes exert the licentious privilege of
      sedition, they no longer possessed the administration of criminal justice;
      nor did they find it easy to infuse into the calm breast of a Roman
      magistrate the rancor of their own zeal and prejudice. The provincial
      governors declared themselves ready to listen to any accusation that might
      affect the public safety; but as soon as they were informed that it was a
      question not of facts but of words, a dispute relating only to the
      interpretation of the Jewish laws and prophecies, they deemed it unworthy
      of the majesty of Rome seriously to discuss the obscure differences which
      might arise among a barbarous and superstitious people. The innocence of
      the first Christians was protected by ignorance and contempt; and the
      tribunal of the Pagan magistrate often proved their most assured refuge
      against the fury of the synagogue. <a href="#Blinknote-26" id="Blinknoteref-26" name="Blinknoteref-26">26</a> If indeed we were
      disposed to adopt the traditions of a too credulous antiquity, we might
      relate the distant peregrinations, the wonderful achievements, and the
      various deaths of the twelve apostles: but a more accurate inquiry will
      induce us to doubt, whether any of those persons who had been witnesses to
      the miracles of Christ were permitted, beyond the limits of Palestine, to
      seal with their blood the truth of their testimony. <a href="#Blinknote-27" id="Blinknoteref-27" name="Blinknoteref-27">27</a> From the ordinary term of
      human life, it may very naturally be presumed that most of them were
      deceased before the discontent of the Jews broke out into that furious
      war, which was terminated only by the ruin of Jerusalem. During a long
      period, from the death of Christ to that memorable rebellion, we cannot
      discover any traces of Roman intolerance, unless they are to be found in
      the sudden, the transient, but the cruel persecution, which was exercised
      by Nero against the Christians of the capital, thirty-five years after the
      former, and only two years before the latter, of those great events. The
      character of the philosophic historian, to whom we are principally
      indebted for the knowledge of this singular transaction, would alone be
      sufficient to recommend it to our most attentive consideration.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-25" name="Blinknote-25">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      25 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-25">return</a>)<br/> [ An obscure passage of
      Suetonius (in Claud. c. 25) may seem to offer a proof how strangely the
      Jews and Christians of Rome were confounded with each other.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-26" name="Blinknote-26">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      26 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-26">return</a>)<br/> [ See, in the xviiith and
      xxvth chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, the behavior of Gallio,
      proconsul of Achaia, and of Festus, procurator of Judea.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-27" name="Blinknote-27">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      27 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-27">return</a>)<br/> [ In the time of Tertullian
      and Clemens of Alexandria, the glory of martyrdom was confined to St.
      Peter, St. Paul, and St. James. It was gradually bestowed on the rest of
      the apostles, by the more recent Greeks, who prudently selected for the
      theatre of their preaching and sufferings some remote country beyond the
      limits of the Roman empire. See Mosheim, p. 81; and Tillemont, Memoires
      Ecclesiastiques, tom. i. part iii.]
    </p>
<p>
      In the tenth year of the reign of Nero, the capital of the empire was
      afflicted by a fire which raged beyond the memory or example of former
      ages. <a href="#Blinknote-28" id="Blinknoteref-28" name="Blinknoteref-28">28</a>
      The monuments of Grecian art and of Roman virtue, the trophies of the
      Punic and Gallic wars, the most holy temples, and the most splendid
      palaces, were involved in one common destruction. Of the fourteen regions
      or quarters into which Rome was divided, four only subsisted entire, three
      were levelled with the ground, and the remaining seven, which had
      experienced the fury of the flames, displayed a melancholy prospect of
      ruin and desolation. The vigilance of government appears not to have
      neglected any of the precautions which might alleviate the sense of so
      dreadful a calamity. The Imperial gardens were thrown open to the
      distressed multitude, temporary buildings were erected for their
      accommodation, and a plentiful supply of corn and provisions was
      distributed at a very moderate price. <a href="#Blinknote-29" id="Blinknoteref-29" name="Blinknoteref-29">29</a> The most generous policy
      seemed to have dictated the edicts which regulated the disposition of the
      streets and the construction of private houses; and as it usually happens,
      in an age of prosperity, the conflagration of Rome, in the course of a few
      years, produced a new city, more regular and more beautiful than the
      former. But all the prudence and humanity affected by Nero on this
      occasion were insufficient to preserve him from the popular suspicion.
      Every crime might be imputed to the assassin of his wife and mother; nor
      could the prince who prostituted his person and dignity on the theatre be
      deemed incapable of the most extravagant folly. The voice of rumor accused
      the emperor as the incendiary of his own capital; and as the most
      incredible stories are the best adapted to the genius of an enraged
      people, it was gravely reported, and firmly believed, that Nero, enjoying
      the calamity which he had occasioned, amused himself with singing to his
      lyre the destruction of ancient Troy. <a href="#Blinknote-30" id="Blinknoteref-30" name="Blinknoteref-30">30</a> To divert a suspicion,
      which the power of despotism was unable to suppress, the emperor resolved
      to substitute in his own place some fictitious criminals. "With this
      view," continues Tacitus, "he inflicted the most exquisite tortures on
      those men, who, under the vulgar appellation of Christians, were already
      branded with deserved infamy. They derived their name and origin from
      Christ, who in the reign of Tiberius had suffered death by the sentence of
      the procurator Pontius Pilate. <a href="#Blinknote-31" id="Blinknoteref-31" name="Blinknoteref-31">31</a> For a while this dire superstition was checked;
      but it again burst forth; <a href="#Blinknote-3111" id="Blinknoteref-3111" name="Blinknoteref-3111">3111</a> and not only spread itself over Judaea, the
      first seat of this mischievous sect, but was even introduced into Rome,
      the common asylum which receives and protects whatever is impure, whatever
      is atrocious. The confessions of those who were seized discovered a great
      multitude of their accomplices, and they were all convicted, not so much
      for the crime of setting fire to the city, as for their hatred of human
      kind. <a href="#Blinknote-32" id="Blinknoteref-32" name="Blinknoteref-32">32</a>
      They died in torments, and their torments were imbittered by insult and
      derision. Some were nailed on crosses; others sewn up in the skins of wild
      beasts, and exposed to the fury of dogs; others again, smeared over with
      combustible materials, were used as torches to illuminate the darkness of
      the night. The gardens of Nero were destined for the melancholy spectacle,
      which was accompanied with a horse-race and honored with the presence of
      the emperor, who mingled with the populace in the dress and attitude of a
      charioteer. The guilt of the Christians deserved indeed the most exemplary
      punishment, but the public abhorrence was changed into commiseration, from
      the opinion that those unhappy wretches were sacrificed, not so much to
      the public welfare, as to the cruelty of a jealous tyrant." <a href="#Blinknote-33" id="Blinknoteref-33" name="Blinknoteref-33">33</a> Those
      who survey with a curious eye the revolutions of mankind, may observe,
      that the gardens and circus of Nero on the Vatican, which were polluted
      with the blood of the first Christians, have been rendered still more
      famous by the triumph and by the abuse of the persecuted religion. On the
      same spot, <a href="#Blinknote-34" id="Blinknoteref-34" name="Blinknoteref-34">34</a>
      a temple, which far surpasses the ancient glories of the Capitol, has been
      since erected by the Christian Pontiffs, who, deriving their claim of
      universal dominion from an humble fisherman of Galilee, have succeeded to
      the throne of the Caesars, given laws to the barbarian conquerors of Rome,
      and extended their spiritual jurisdiction from the coast of the Baltic to
      the shores of the Pacific Ocean.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-28" name="Blinknote-28">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      28 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-28">return</a>)<br/> [ Tacit. Annal. xv. 38—44.
      Sueton in Neron. c. 38. Dion Cassius, l. lxii. p. 1014. Orosius, vii. 7.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-29" name="Blinknote-29">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      29 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-29">return</a>)<br/> [ The price of wheat
      (probably of the modius,) was reduced as low as terni Nummi; which would
      be equivalent to about fifteen shillings the English quarter.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-30" name="Blinknote-30">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      30 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-30">return</a>)<br/> [ We may observe, that the
      rumor is mentioned by Tacitus with a very becoming distrust and
      hesitation, whilst it is greedily transcribed by Suetonius, and solemnly
      confirmed by Dion.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-31" name="Blinknote-31">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      31 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-31">return</a>)<br/> [ This testimony is alone
      sufficient to expose the anachronism of the Jews, who place the birth of
      Christ near a century sooner. (Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. v. c. 14,
      15.) We may learn from Josephus, (Antiquitat. xviii. 3,) that the
      procuratorship of Pilate corresponded with the last ten years of Tiberius,
      A. D. 27—37. As to the particular time of the death of Christ, a
      very early tradition fixed it to the 25th of March, A. D. 29, under the
      consulship of the two Gemini. (Tertullian adv. Judaeos, c. 8.) This date,
      which is adopted by Pagi, Cardinal Norris, and Le Clerc, seems at least as
      probable as the vulgar aera, which is placed (I know not from what
      conjectures) four years later.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-3111" name="Blinknote-3111">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3111 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-3111">return</a>)<br/> [ This single phrase,
      Repressa in praesens exitiabilis superstitio rursus erumpebat, proves that
      the Christians had already attracted the attention of the government; and
      that Nero was not the first to persecute them. I am surprised that more
      stress has not been laid on the confirmation which the Acts of the
      Apostles derive from these words of Tacitus, Repressa in praesens, and
      rursus erumpebat.—G. ——I have been unwilling to suppress
      this note, but surely the expression of Tacitus refers to the expected
      extirpation of the religion by the death of its founder, Christ.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-32" name="Blinknote-32">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      32 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-32">return</a>)<br/> [ Odio humani generis
      convicti. These words may either signify the hatred of mankind towards the
      Christians, or the hatred of the Christians towards mankind. I have
      preferred the latter sense, as the most agreeable to the style of Tacitus,
      and to the popular error, of which a precept of the gospel (see Luke xiv.
      26) had been, perhaps, the innocent occasion. My interpretation is
      justified by the authority of Lipsius; of the Italian, the French, and the
      English translators of Tacitus; of Mosheim, (p. 102,) of Le Clerc,
      (Historia Ecclesiast. p. 427,) of Dr. Lardner, (Testimonies, vol. i. p.
      345,) and of the Bishop of Gloucester, (Divine Legation, vol. iii. p. 38.)
      But as the word convicti does not unite very happily with the rest of the
      sentence, James Gronovius has preferred the reading of conjuncti, which is
      authorized by the valuable MS. of Florence.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-33" name="Blinknote-33">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      33 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-33">return</a>)<br/> [ Tacit. Annal xv. 44.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-34" name="Blinknote-34">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      34 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-34">return</a>)<br/> [ Nardini Roma Antica, p.
      487. Donatus de Roma Antiqua, l. iii. p. 449.]
    </p>
<p>
      But it would be improper to dismiss this account of Nero's persecution,
      till we have made some observations that may serve to remove the
      difficulties with which it is perplexed, and to throw some light on the
      subsequent history of the church.
    </p>
<p>
      1. The most sceptical criticism is obliged to respect the truth of this
      extraordinary fact, and the integrity of this celebrated passage of
      Tacitus. The former is confirmed by the diligent and accurate Suetonius,
      who mentions the punishment which Nero inflicted on the Christians, a sect
      of men who had embraced a new and criminal superstition. <a href="#Blinknote-35" id="Blinknoteref-35" name="Blinknoteref-35">35</a> The
      latter may be proved by the consent of the most ancient manuscripts; by
      the inimitable character of the style of Tacitus by his reputation, which
      guarded his text from the interpolations of pious fraud; and by the
      purport of his narration, which accused the first Christians of the most
      atrocious crimes, without insinuating that they possessed any miraculous
      or even magical powers above the rest of mankind. <a href="#Blinknote-36" id="Blinknoteref-36" name="Blinknoteref-36">36</a> 2. Notwithstanding it is
      probable that Tacitus was born some years before the fire of Rome, <a href="#Blinknote-37" id="Blinknoteref-37" name="Blinknoteref-37">37</a> he
      could derive only from reading and conversation the knowledge of an event
      which happened during his infancy. Before he gave himself to the public,
      he calmly waited till his genius had attained its full maturity, and he
      was more than forty years of age, when a grateful regard for the memory of
      the virtuous Agricola extorted from him the most early of those historical
      compositions which will delight and instruct the most distant posterity.
      After making a trial of his strength in the life of Agricola and the
      description of Germany, he conceived, and at length executed, a more
      arduous work; the history of Rome, in thirty books, from the fall of Nero
      to the accession of Nerva. The administration of Nerva introduced an age
      of justice and propriety, which Tacitus had destined for the occupation of
      his old age; <a href="#Blinknote-38" id="Blinknoteref-38" name="Blinknoteref-38">38</a> but when he took a nearer view of his subject,
      judging, perhaps, that it was a more honorable or a less invidious office
      to record the vices of past tyrants, than to celebrate the virtues of a
      reigning monarch, he chose rather to relate, under the form of annals, the
      actions of the four immediate successors of Augustus. To collect, to
      dispose, and to adorn a series of fourscore years, in an immortal work,
      every sentence of which is pregnant with the deepest observations and the
      most lively images, was an undertaking sufficient to exercise the genius
      of Tacitus himself during the greatest part of his life. In the last years
      of the reign of Trajan, whilst the victorious monarch extended the power
      of Rome beyond its ancient limits, the historian was describing, in the
      second and fourth books of his annals, the tyranny of Tiberius; <a href="#Blinknote-39" id="Blinknoteref-39" name="Blinknoteref-39">39</a> and
      the emperor Hadrian must have succeeded to the throne, before Tacitus, in
      the regular prosecution of his work, could relate the fire of the capital,
      and the cruelty of Nero towards the unfortunate Christians. At the
      distance of sixty years, it was the duty of the annalist to adopt the
      narratives of contemporaries; but it was natural for the philosopher to
      indulge himself in the description of the origin, the progress, and the
      character of the new sect, not so much according to the knowledge or
      prejudices of the age of Nero, as according to those of the time of
      Hadrian. 3 Tacitus very frequently trusts to the curiosity or reflection
      of his readers to supply those intermediate circumstances and ideas,
      which, in his extreme conciseness, he has thought proper to suppress. We
      may therefore presume to imagine some probable cause which could direct
      the cruelty of Nero against the Christians of Rome, whose obscurity, as
      well as innocence, should have shielded them from his indignation, and
      even from his notice. The Jews, who were numerous in the capital, and
      oppressed in their own country, were a much fitter object for the
      suspicions of the emperor and of the people: nor did it seem unlikely that
      a vanquished nation, who already discovered their abhorrence of the Roman
      yoke, might have recourse to the most atrocious means of gratifying their
      implacable revenge. But the Jews possessed very powerful advocates in the
      palace, and even in the heart of the tyrant; his wife and mistress, the
      beautiful Poppaea, and a favorite player of the race of Abraham, who had
      already employed their intercession in behalf of the obnoxious people. <a href="#Blinknote-40" id="Blinknoteref-40" name="Blinknoteref-40">40</a> In
      their room it was necessary to offer some other victims, and it might
      easily be suggested that, although the genuine followers of Moses were
      innocent of the fire of Rome, there had arisen among them a new and
      pernicious sect of Galilaeans, which was capable of the most horrid
      crimes. Under the appellation of Galilaeans, two distinctions of men were
      confounded, the most opposite to each other in their manners and
      principles; the disciples who had embraced the faith of Jesus of Nazareth,
      <a href="#Blinknote-41" id="Blinknoteref-41" name="Blinknoteref-41">41</a>
      and the zealots who had followed the standard of Judas the Gaulonite. <a href="#Blinknote-42" id="Blinknoteref-42" name="Blinknoteref-42">42</a> The
      former were the friends, the latter were the enemies, of human kind; and
      the only resemblance between them consisted in the same inflexible
      constancy, which, in the defence of their cause, rendered them insensible
      of death and tortures. The followers of Judas, who impelled their
      countrymen into rebellion, were soon buried under the ruins of Jerusalem;
      whilst those of Jesus, known by the more celebrated name of Christians,
      diffused themselves over the Roman empire. How natural was it for Tacitus,
      in the time of Hadrian, to appropriate to the Christians the guilt and the
      sufferings, <a href="#Blinknote-4211" id="Blinknoteref-4211" name="Blinknoteref-4211">4211</a> which he might, with far greater truth and
      justice, have attributed to a sect whose odious memory was almost
      extinguished! 4. Whatever opinion may be entertained of this conjecture,
      (for it is no more than a conjecture,) it is evident that the effect, as
      well as the cause, of Nero's persecution, was confined to the walls of
      Rome, <a href="#Blinknote-43" id="Blinknoteref-43" name="Blinknoteref-43">43</a>
      that the religious tenets of the Galilaeans or Christians, <a href="#Blinknote-431" id="Blinknoteref-431" name="Blinknoteref-431">431</a>
      were never made a subject of punishment, or even of inquiry; and that, as
      the idea of their sufferings was for a long time connected with the idea
      of cruelty and injustice, the moderation of succeeding princes inclined
      them to spare a sect, oppressed by a tyrant, whose rage had been usually
      directed against virtue and innocence.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-35" name="Blinknote-35">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      35 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-35">return</a>)<br/> [ Sueton. in Nerone, c. 16.
      The epithet of malefica, which some sagacious commentators have translated
      magical, is considered by the more rational Mosheim as only synonymous to
      the exitiabilis of Tacitus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-36" name="Blinknote-36">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      36 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-36">return</a>)<br/> [ The passage concerning
      Jesus Christ, which was inserted into the text of Josephus, between the
      time of Origen and that of Eusebius, may furnish an example of no vulgar
      forgery. The accomplishment of the prophecies, the virtues, miracles, and
      resurrection of Jesus, are distinctly related. Josephus acknowledges that
      he was the Messiah, and hesitates whether he should call him a man. If any
      doubt can still remain concerning this celebrated passage, the reader may
      examine the pointed objections of Le Fevre, (Havercamp. Joseph. tom. ii.
      p. 267-273), the labored answers of Daubuz, (p. 187-232, and the masterly
      reply (Bibliotheque Ancienne et Moderne, tom. vii. p. 237-288) of an
      anonymous critic, whom I believe to have been the learned Abbe de
      Longuerue. * Note: The modern editor of Eusebius, Heinichen, has adopted,
      and ably supported, a notion, which had before suggested itself to the
      editor, that this passage is not altogether a forgery, but interpolated
      with many additional clauses. Heinichen has endeavored to disengage the
      original text from the foreign and more recent matter.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-37" name="Blinknote-37">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      37 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-37">return</a>)<br/> [ See the lives of Tacitus
      by Lipsius and the Abbe de la Bleterie, Dictionnaire de Bayle a l'article
      Particle Tacite, and Fabricius, Biblioth. Latin tem. Latin. tom. ii. p.
      386, edit. Ernest. Ernst.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-38" name="Blinknote-38">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      38 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-38">return</a>)<br/> [ Principatum Divi Nervae,
      et imperium Trajani, uberiorem, securioremque materiam senectuti seposui.
      Tacit. Hist. i.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-39" name="Blinknote-39">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      39 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-39">return</a>)<br/> [ See Tacit. Annal. ii. 61,
      iv. 4. * Note: The perusal of this passage of Tacitus alone is sufficient,
      as I have already said, to show that the Christian sect was not so obscure
      as not already to have been repressed, (repressa,) and that it did not
      pass for innocent in the eyes of the Romans.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-40" name="Blinknote-40">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      40 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-40">return</a>)<br/> [ The player's name was
      Aliturus. Through the same channel, Josephus, (de vita sua, c. 2,) about
      two years before, had obtained the pardon and release of some Jewish
      priests, who were prisoners at Rome.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-41" name="Blinknote-41">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      41 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-41">return</a>)<br/> [ The learned Dr. Lardner
      (Jewish and Heathen Testimonies, vol ii. p. 102, 103) has proved that the
      name of Galilaeans was a very ancient, and perhaps the primitive
      appellation of the Christians.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-42" name="Blinknote-42">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      42 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-42">return</a>)<br/> [ Joseph. Antiquitat.
      xviii. 1, 2. Tillemont, Ruine des Juifs, p. 742 The sons of Judas were
      crucified in the time of Claudius. His grandson Eleazar, after Jerusalem
      was taken, defended a strong fortress with 960 of his most desperate
      followers. When the battering ram had made a breach, they turned their
      swords against their wives their children, and at length against their own
      breasts. They dies to the last man.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-4211" name="Blinknote-4211">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4211 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-4211">return</a>)<br/> [ This conjecture is
      entirely devoid, not merely of verisimilitude, but even of possibility.
      Tacitus could not be deceived in appropriating to the Christians of Rome
      the guilt and the sufferings which he might have attributed with far
      greater truth to the followers of Judas the Gaulonite, for the latter
      never went to Rome. Their revolt, their attempts, their opinions, their
      wars, their punishment, had no other theatre but Judaea (Basn. Hist. des.
      Juifs, t. i. p. 491.) Moreover the name of Christians had long been given
      in Rome to the disciples of Jesus; and Tacitus affirms too positively,
      refers too distinctly to its etymology, to allow us to suspect any mistake
      on his part.—G. ——M. Guizot's expressions are not in the
      least too strong against this strange imagination of Gibbon; it may be
      doubted whether the followers of Judas were known as a sect under the name
      of Galilaeans.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-43" name="Blinknote-43">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      43 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-43">return</a>)<br/> [ See Dodwell. Paucitat.
      Mart. l. xiii. The Spanish Inscription in Gruter. p. 238, No. 9, is a
      manifest and acknowledged forgery contrived by that noted imposter.
      Cyriacus of Ancona, to flatter the pride and prejudices of the Spaniards.
      See Ferreras, Histoire D'Espagne, tom. i. p. 192.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-431" name="Blinknote-431">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      431 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-431">return</a>)<br/> [ M. Guizot, on the
      authority of Sulpicius Severus, ii. 37, and of Orosius, viii. 5, inclines
      to the opinion of those who extend the persecution to the provinces.
      Mosheim rather leans to that side on this much disputed question, (c.
      xxxv.) Neander takes the view of Gibbon, which is in general that of the
      most learned writers. There is indeed no evidence, which I can discover,
      of its reaching the provinces; and the apparent security, at least as
      regards his life, with which St. Paul pursued his travels during this
      period, affords at least a strong inference against a rigid and general
      inquisition against the Christians in other parts of the empire.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      It is somewhat remarkable that the flames of war consumed, almost at the
      same time, the temple of Jerusalem and the Capitol of Rome; <a href="#Blinknote-44" id="Blinknoteref-44" name="Blinknoteref-44">44</a> and
      it appears no less singular, that the tribute which devotion had destined
      to the former, should have been converted by the power of an assaulting
      victor to restore and adorn the splendor of the latter. <a href="#Blinknote-45" id="Blinknoteref-45" name="Blinknoteref-45">45</a> The
      emperors levied a general capitation tax on the Jewish people; and
      although the sum assessed on the head of each individual was
      inconsiderable, the use for which it was designed, and the severity with
      which it was exacted, were considered as an intolerable grievance. <a href="#Blinknote-46" id="Blinknoteref-46" name="Blinknoteref-46">46</a> Since
      the officers of the revenue extended their unjust claim to many persons
      who were strangers to the blood or religion of the Jews, it was impossible
      that the Christians, who had so often sheltered themselves under the shade
      of the synagogue, should now escape this rapacious persecution. Anxious as
      they were to avoid the slightest infection of idolatry, their conscience
      forbade them to contribute to the honor of that daemon who had assumed the
      character of the Capitoline Jupiter. As a very numerous though declining
      party among the Christians still adhered to the law of Moses, their
      efforts to dissemble their Jewish origin were detected by the decisive
      test of circumcision; <a href="#Blinknote-47" id="Blinknoteref-47" name="Blinknoteref-47">47</a> nor were the Roman magistrates at leisure to
      inquire into the difference of their religious tenets. Among the
      Christians who were brought before the tribunal of the emperor, or, as it
      seems more probable, before that of the procurator of Judaea, two persons
      are said to have appeared, distinguished by their extraction, which was
      more truly noble than that of the greatest monarchs. These were the
      grandsons of St. Jude the apostle, who himself was the brother of Jesus
      Christ. <a href="#Blinknote-48" id="Blinknoteref-48" name="Blinknoteref-48">48</a>
      Their natural pretensions to the throne of David might perhaps attract the
      respect of the people, and excite the jealousy of the governor; but the
      meanness of their garb, and the simplicity of their answers, soon
      convinced him that they were neither desirous nor capable of disturbing
      the peace of the Roman empire. They frankly confessed their royal origin,
      and their near relation to the Messiah; but they disclaimed any temporal
      views, and professed that his kingdom, which they devoutly expected, was
      purely of a spiritual and angelic nature. When they were examined
      concerning their fortune and occupation, they showed their hands, hardened
      with daily labor, and declared that they derived their whole subsistence
      from the cultivation of a farm near the village of Cocaba, of the extent
      of about twenty-four English acres, <a href="#Blinknote-49" id="Blinknoteref-49" name="Blinknoteref-49">49</a> and of the value of nine
      thousand drachms, or three hundred pounds sterling. The grandsons of St.
      Jude were dismissed with compassion and contempt. <a href="#Blinknote-50" id="Blinknoteref-50" name="Blinknoteref-50">50</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-44" name="Blinknote-44">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      44 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-44">return</a>)<br/> [ The Capitol was burnt
      during the civil war between Vitellius and Vespasian, the 19th of
      December, A. D. 69. On the 10th of August, A. D. 70, the temple of
      Jerusalem was destroyed by the hands of the Jews themselves, rather than
      by those of the Romans.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-45" name="Blinknote-45">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      45 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-45">return</a>)<br/> [ The new Capitol was
      dedicated by Domitian. Sueton. in Domitian. c. 5. Plutarch in Poplicola,
      tom. i. p. 230, edit. Bryant. The gilding alone cost 12,000 talents (above
      two millions and a half.) It was the opinion of Martial, (l. ix. Epigram
      3,) that if the emperor had called in his debts, Jupiter himself, even
      though he had made a general auction of Olympus, would have been unable to
      pay two shillings in the pound.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-46" name="Blinknote-46">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      46 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-46">return</a>)<br/> [ With regard to the
      tribute, see Dion Cassius, l. lxvi. p. 1082, with Reimarus's notes.
      Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum, tom. ii. p. 571; and Basnage, Histoire des
      Juifs, l. vii. c. 2.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-47" name="Blinknote-47">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      47 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-47">return</a>)<br/> [ Suetonius (in Domitian.
      c. 12) had seen an old man of ninety publicly examined before the
      procurator's tribunal. This is what Martial calls, Mentula tributis
      damnata.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-48" name="Blinknote-48">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      48 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-48">return</a>)<br/> [ This appellation was at
      first understood in the most obvious sense, and it was supposed, that the
      brothers of Jesus were the lawful issue of Joseph and Mary. A devout
      respect for the virginity of the mother of God suggested to the Gnostics,
      and afterwards to the orthodox Greeks, the expedient of bestowing a second
      wife on Joseph. The Latins (from the time of Jerome) improved on that
      hint, asserted the perpetual celibacy of Joseph, and justified by many
      similar examples the new interpretation that Jude, as well as Simon and
      James, who were styled the brothers of Jesus Christ, were only his first
      cousins. See Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiat. tom. i. part iii.: and Beausobre,
      Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. ii. c. 2.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-49" name="Blinknote-49">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      49 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-49">return</a>)<br/> [ Thirty-nine, squares of a
      hundred feet each, which, if strictly computed, would scarcely amount to
      nine acres.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-50" name="Blinknote-50">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      50 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-50">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, iii. 20. The
      story is taken from Hegesippus.]
    </p>
<p>
      But although the obscurity of the house of David might protect them from
      the suspicions of a tyrant, the present greatness of his own family
      alarmed the pusillanimous temper of Domitian, which could only be appeased
      by the blood of those Romans whom he either feared, or hated, or esteemed.
      Of the two sons of his uncle Flavius Sabinus, <a href="#Blinknote-51" id="Blinknoteref-51" name="Blinknoteref-51">51</a> the elder was soon
      convicted of treasonable intentions, and the younger, who bore the name of
      Flavius Clemens, was indebted for his safety to his want of courage and
      ability. <a href="#Blinknote-52" id="Blinknoteref-52" name="Blinknoteref-52">52</a>
      The emperor for a long time, distinguished so harmless a kinsman by his
      favor and protection, bestowed on him his own niece Domitilla, adopted the
      children of that marriage to the hope of the succession, and invested
      their father with the honors of the consulship.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-51" name="Blinknote-51">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      51 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-51">return</a>)<br/> [ See the death and
      character of Sabinus in Tacitus, (Hist. iii. 74 ) Sabinus was the elder
      brother, and, till the accession of Vespasian, had been considered as the
      principal support of the Flavium family]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-52" name="Blinknote-52">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      52 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-52">return</a>)<br/> [ Flavium Clementem
      patruelem suum contemptissimoe inertice.. ex tenuissima suspicione
      interemit. Sueton. in Domitian. c. 15.]
    </p>
<p>
      But he had scarcely finished the term of his annual magistracy, when, on a
      slight pretence, he was condemned and executed; Domitilla was banished to
      a desolate island on the coast of Campania; <a href="#Blinknote-53" id="Blinknoteref-53" name="Blinknoteref-53">53</a> and sentences either of
      death or of confiscation were pronounced against a great number of who
      were involved in the same accusation. The guilt imputed to their charge
      was that of Atheism and Jewish manners; <a href="#Blinknote-54" id="Blinknoteref-54" name="Blinknoteref-54">54</a> a singular association of
      ideas, which cannot with any propriety be applied except to the
      Christians, as they were obscurely and imperfectly viewed by the
      magistrates and by the writers of that period. On the strength of so
      probable an interpretation, and too eagerly admitting the suspicions of a
      tyrant as an evidence of their honorable crime, the church has placed both
      Clemens and Domitilla among its first martyrs, and has branded the cruelty
      of Domitian with the name of the second persecution. But this persecution
      (if it deserves that epithet) was of no long duration. A few months after
      the death of Clemens, and the banishment of Domitilla, Stephen, a freedman
      belonging to the latter, who had enjoyed the favor, but who had not surely
      embraced the faith, of his mistress, <a href="#Blinknote-5411" id="Blinknoteref-5411" name="Blinknoteref-5411">5411</a> assassinated the
      emperor in his palace. <a href="#Blinknote-55" id="Blinknoteref-55" name="Blinknoteref-55">55</a> The memory of Domitian was condemned by the
      senate; his acts were rescinded; his exiles recalled; and under the gentle
      administration of Nerva, while the innocent were restored to their rank
      and fortunes, even the most guilty either obtained pardon or escaped
      punishment. <a href="#Blinknote-56" id="Blinknoteref-56" name="Blinknoteref-56">56</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-53" name="Blinknote-53">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      53 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-53">return</a>)<br/> [ The Isle of Pandataria,
      according to Dion. Bruttius Praesens (apud Euseb. iii. 18) banishes her to
      that of Pontia, which was not far distant from the other. That difference,
      and a mistake, either of Eusebius or of his transcribers, have given
      occasion to suppose two Domitillas, the wife and the niece of Clemens. See
      Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. ii. p. 224.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-54" name="Blinknote-54">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      54 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-54">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion. l. lxvii. p. 1112.
      If the Bruttius Praesens, from whom it is probable that he collected this
      account, was the correspondent of Pliny, (Epistol. vii. 3,) we may
      consider him as a contemporary writer.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-5411" name="Blinknote-5411">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5411 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-5411">return</a>)<br/> [ This is an uncandid
      sarcasm. There is nothing to connect Stephen with the religion of
      Domitilla. He was a knave detected in the malversation of money—interceptarum
      pecuniaram reus.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-55" name="Blinknote-55">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      55 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-55">return</a>)<br/> [ Suet. in Domit. c. 17.
      Philostratus in Vit. Apollon. l. viii.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-56" name="Blinknote-56">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      56 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-56">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion. l. lxviii. p. 1118.
      Plin. Epistol. iv. 22.]
    </p>
<p>
      II. About ten years afterwards, under the reign of Trajan, the younger
      Pliny was intrusted by his friend and master with the government of
      Bithynia and Pontus. He soon found himself at a loss to determine by what
      rule of justice or of law he should direct his conduct in the execution of
      an office the most repugnant to his humanity. Pliny had never assisted at
      any judicial proceedings against the Christians, with whose name alone he
      seems to be acquainted; and he was totally uninformed with regard to the
      nature of their guilt, the method of their conviction, and the degree of
      their punishment. In this perplexity he had recourse to his usual
      expedient, of submitting to the wisdom of Trajan an impartial, and, in
      some respects, a favorable account of the new superstition, requesting the
      emperor, that he would condescend to resolve his doubts, and to instruct
      his ignorance. <a href="#Blinknote-57" id="Blinknoteref-57" name="Blinknoteref-57">57</a> The life of Pliny had been employed in the
      acquisition of learning, and in the business of the world.
    </p>
<p>
      Since the age of nineteen he had pleaded with distinction in the tribunals
      of Rome, <a href="#Blinknote-58" id="Blinknoteref-58" name="Blinknoteref-58">58</a>
      filled a place in the senate, had been invested with the honors of the
      consulship, and had formed very numerous connections with every order of
      men, both in Italy and in the provinces. From his ignorance therefore we
      may derive some useful information. We may assure ourselves, that when he
      accepted the government of Bithynia, there were no general laws or decrees
      of the senate in force against the Christians; that neither Trajan nor any
      of his virtuous predecessors, whose edicts were received into the civil
      and criminal jurisprudence, had publicly declared their intentions
      concerning the new sect; and that whatever proceedings had been carried on
      against the Christians, there were none of sufficient weight and authority
      to establish a precedent for the conduct of a Roman magistrate.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-57" name="Blinknote-57">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      57 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-57">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Epistol. x. 97. The
      learned Mosheim expresses himself (p. 147, 232) with the highest
      approbation of Pliny's moderate and candid temper. Notwithstanding Dr.
      Lardner's suspicions (see Jewish and Heathen Testimonies, vol. ii. p. 46,)
      I am unable to discover any bigotry in his language or proceedings. *
      Note: Yet the humane Pliny put two female attendants, probably deaconesses
      to the torture, in order to ascertain the real nature of these suspicious
      meetings: necessarium credidi, ex duabus ancillis, quae ministrae
      dicebantor quid asset veri et per tormenta quaerere.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-58" name="Blinknote-58">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      58 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-58">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Epist. v. 8. He
      pleaded his first cause A. D. 81; the year after the famous eruptions of
      Mount Vesuvius, in which his uncle lost his life.]
    </p>
<p>
      The answer of Trajan, to which the Christians of the succeeding age have
      frequently appealed, discovers as much regard for justice and humanity as
      could be reconciled with his mistaken notions of religious policy. <a href="#Blinknote-59" id="Blinknoteref-59" name="Blinknoteref-59">59</a>
      Instead of displaying the implacable zeal of an inquisitor, anxious to
      discover the most minute particles of heresy, and exulting in the number
      of his victims, the emperor expresses much more solicitude to protect the
      security of the innocent, than to prevent the escape of the guilty. He
      acknowledged the difficulty of fixing any general plan; but he lays down
      two salutary rules, which often afforded relief and support to the
      distressed Christians. Though he directs the magistrates to punish such
      persons as are legally convicted, he prohibits them, with a very humane
      inconsistency, from making any inquiries concerning the supposed
      criminals. Nor was the magistrate allowed to proceed on every kind of
      information. Anonymous charges the emperor rejects, as too repugnant to
      the equity of his government; and he strictly requires, for the conviction
      of those to whom the guilt of Christianity is imputed, the positive
      evidence of a fair and open accuser. It is likewise probable, that the
      persons who assumed so invidiuous an office, were obliged to declare the
      grounds of their suspicions, to specify (both in respect to time and
      place) the secret assemblies, which their Christian adversary had
      frequented, and to disclose a great number of circumstances, which were
      concealed with the most vigilant jealousy from the eye of the profane. If
      they succeeded in their prosecution, they were exposed to the resentment
      of a considerable and active party, to the censure of the more liberal
      portion of mankind, and to the ignominy which, in every age and country,
      has attended the character of an informer. If, on the contrary, they
      failed in their proofs, they incurred the severe and perhaps capital
      penalty, which, according to a law published by the emperor Hadrian, was
      inflicted on those who falsely attributed to their fellow-citizens the
      crime of Christianity. The violence of personal or superstitious animosity
      might sometimes prevail over the most natural apprehensions of disgrace
      and danger but it cannot surely be imagined, <a href="#Blinknote-60" id="Blinknoteref-60" name="Blinknoteref-60">60</a> that accusations of so
      unpromising an appearance were either lightly or frequently undertaken by
      the Pagan subjects of the Roman empire. <a href="#Blinknote-6011" id="Blinknoteref-6011" name="Blinknoteref-6011">6011</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-59" name="Blinknote-59">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      59 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-59">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Epist. x. 98.
      Tertullian (Apolog. c. 5) considers this rescript as a relaxation of the
      ancient penal laws, "quas Trajanus exparte frustratus est:" and yet
      Tertullian, in another part of his Apology, exposes the inconsistency of
      prohibiting inquiries, and enjoining punishments.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-60" name="Blinknote-60">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      60 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-60">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius (Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. iv. c. 9) has preserved the edict of Hadrian. He has
      likewise (c. 13) given us one still more favorable, under the name of
      Antoninus; the authenticity of which is not so universally allowed. The
      second Apology of Justin contains some curious particulars relative to the
      accusations of Christians. * Note: Professor Hegelmayer has proved the
      authenticity of the edict of Antoninus, in his Comm. Hist. Theol. in
      Edict. Imp. Antonini. Tubing. 1777, in 4to.—G. ——Neander
      doubts its authenticity, (vol. i. p. 152.) In my opinion, the internal
      evidence is decisive against it.—M]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-6011" name="Blinknote-6011">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6011 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-6011">return</a>)<br/> [ The enactment of this
      law affords strong presumption, that accusations of the "crime of
      Christianity," were by no means so uncommon, nor received with so much
      mistrust and caution by the ruling authorities, as Gibbon would insinuate.
      —M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The expedient which was employed to elude the prudence of the laws,
      affords a sufficient proof how effectually they disappointed the
      mischievous designs of private malice or superstitious zeal. In a large
      and tumultuous assembly, the restraints of fear and shame, so forcible on
      the minds of individuals, are deprived of the greatest part of their
      influence. The pious Christian, as he was desirous to obtain, or to
      escape, the glory of martyrdom, expected, either with impatience or with
      terror, the stated returns of the public games and festivals. On those
      occasions the inhabitants of the great cities of the empire were collected
      in the circus or the theatre, where every circumstance of the place, as
      well as of the ceremony, contributed to kindle their devotion, and to
      extinguish their humanity. Whilst the numerous spectators, crowned with
      garlands, perfumed with incense, purified with the blood of victims, and
      surrounded with the altars and statues of their tutelar deities, resigned
      themselves to the enjoyment of pleasures, which they considered as an
      essential part of their religious worship, they recollected, that the
      Christians alone abhorred the gods of mankind, and by their absence and
      melancholy on these solemn festivals, seemed to insult or to lament the
      public felicity. If the empire had been afflicted by any recent calamity,
      by a plague, a famine, or an unsuccessful war; if the Tyber had, or if the
      Nile had not, risen beyond its banks; if the earth had shaken, or if the
      temperate order of the seasons had been interrupted, the superstitious
      Pagans were convinced that the crimes and the impiety of the Christians,
      who were spared by the excessive lenity of the government, had at length
      provoked the divine justice. It was not among a licentious and exasperated
      populace, that the forms of legal proceedings could be observed; it was
      not in an amphitheatre, stained with the blood of wild beasts and
      gladiators, that the voice of compassion could be heard. The impatient
      clamors of the multitude denounced the Christians as the enemies of gods
      and men, doomed them to the severest tortures, and venturing to accuse by
      name some of the most distinguished of the new sectaries, required with
      irresistible vehemence that they should be instantly apprehended and cast
      to the lions. <a href="#Blinknote-61" id="Blinknoteref-61" name="Blinknoteref-61">61</a> The provincial governors and magistrates who
      presided in the public spectacles were usually inclined to gratify the
      inclinations, and to appease the rage, of the people, by the sacrifice of
      a few obnoxious victims. But the wisdom of the emperors protected the
      church from the danger of these tumultuous clamors and irregular
      accusations, which they justly censured as repugnant both to the firmness
      and to the equity of their administration. The edicts of Hadrian and of
      Antoninus Pius expressly declared, that the voice of the multitude should
      never be admitted as legal evidence to convict or to punish those
      unfortunate persons who had embraced the enthusiasm of the Christians. <a href="#Blinknote-62" id="Blinknoteref-62" name="Blinknoteref-62">62</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-61" name="Blinknote-61">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      61 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-61">return</a>)<br/> [ See Tertullian, (Apolog.
      c. 40.) The acts of the martyrdom of Polycarp exhibit a lively picture of
      these tumults, which were usually fomented by the malice of the Jews.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-62" name="Blinknote-62">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      62 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-62">return</a>)<br/> [ These regulations are
      inserted in the above mentioned document of Hadrian and Pius. See the
      apology of Melito, (apud Euseb. l iv 26)]
    </p>
<p>
      III. Punishment was not the inevitable consequence of conviction, and the
      Christians, whose guilt was the most clearly proved by the testimony of
      witnesses, or even by their voluntary confession, still retained in their
      own power the alternative of life or death. It was not so much the past
      offence, as the actual resistance, which excited the indignation of the
      magistrate. He was persuaded that he offered them an easy pardon, since,
      if they consented to cast a few grains of incense upon the altar, they
      were dismissed from the tribunal in safety and with applause. It was
      esteemed the duty of a humane judge to endeavor to reclaim, rather than to
      punish, those deluded enthusiasts. Varying his tone according to the age,
      the sex, or the situation of the prisoners, he frequently condescended to
      set before their eyes every circumstance which could render life more
      pleasing, or death more terrible; and to solicit, nay, to entreat, them,
      that they would show some compassion to themselves, to their families, and
      to their friends. <a href="#Blinknote-63" id="Blinknoteref-63" name="Blinknoteref-63">63</a> If threats and persuasions proved ineffectual,
      he had often recourse to violence; the scourge and the rack were called in
      to supply the deficiency of argument, and every art of cruelty was
      employed to subdue such inflexible, and, as it appeared to the Pagans,
      such criminal, obstinacy. The ancient apologists of Christianity have
      censured, with equal truth and severity, the irregular conduct of their
      persecutors who, contrary to every principle of judicial proceeding,
      admitted the use of torture, in order to obtain, not a confession, but a
      denial, of the crime which was the object of their inquiry. <a href="#Blinknote-64" id="Blinknoteref-64" name="Blinknoteref-64">64</a> The
      monks of succeeding ages, who, in their peaceful solitudes, entertained
      themselves with diversifying the deaths and sufferings of the primitive
      martyrs, have frequently invented torments of a much more refined and
      ingenious nature. In particular, it has pleased them to suppose, that the
      zeal of the Roman magistrates, disdaining every consideration of moral
      virtue or public decency, endeavored to seduce those whom they were unable
      to vanquish, and that by their orders the most brutal violence was offered
      to those whom they found it impossible to seduce. It is related, that
      females, who were prepared to despise death, were sometimes condemned to a
      more severe trial, <a href="#Blinknote-6411" id="Blinknoteref-6411" name="Blinknoteref-6411">6411</a> and called upon to determine whether they
      set a higher value on their religion or on their chastity. The youths to
      whose licentious embraces they were abandoned, received a solemn
      exhortation from the judge, to exert their most strenuous efforts to
      maintain the honor of Venus against the impious virgin who refused to burn
      incense on her altars. Their violence, however, was commonly disappointed,
      and the seasonable interposition of some miraculous power preserved the
      chaste spouses of Christ from the dishonor even of an involuntary defeat.
      We should not indeed neglect to remark, that the more ancient as well as
      authentic memorials of the church are seldom polluted with these
      extravagant and indecent fictions. <a href="#Blinknote-65" id="Blinknoteref-65" name="Blinknoteref-65">65</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-63" name="Blinknote-63">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      63 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-63">return</a>)<br/> [ See the rescript of
      Trajan, and the conduct of Pliny. The most authentic acts of the martyrs
      abound in these exhortations. Note: Pliny's test was the worship of the
      gods, offerings to the statue of the emperor, and blaspheming Christ—praeterea
      maledicerent Christo.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-64" name="Blinknote-64">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      64 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-64">return</a>)<br/> [ In particular, see
      Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 2, 3,) and Lactantius, (Institut. Divin. v. 9.)
      Their reasonings are almost the same; but we may discover, that one of
      these apologists had been a lawyer, and the other a rhetorician.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-6411" name="Blinknote-6411">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6411 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-6411">return</a>)<br/> [ The more ancient as
      well as authentic memorials of the church, relate many examples of the
      fact, (of these severe trials,) which there is nothing to contradict.
      Tertullian, among others, says, Nam proxime ad lenonem damnando
      Christianam, potius quam ad leonem, confessi estis labem pudicitiae apud
      nos atrociorem omni poena et omni morte reputari, Apol. cap. ult. Eusebius
      likewise says, "Other virgins, dragged to brothels, have lost their life
      rather than defile their virtue." Euseb. Hist. Ecc. viii. 14.—G. The
      miraculous interpositions were the offspring of the coarse imaginations of
      the monks.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-65" name="Blinknote-65">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      65 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-65">return</a>)<br/> [ See two instances of this
      kind of torture in the Acta Sincere Martyrum, published by Ruinart, p.
      160, 399. Jerome, in his Legend of Paul the Hermit, tells a strange story
      of a young man, who was chained naked on a bed of flowers, and assaulted
      by a beautiful and wanton courtesan. He quelled the rising temptation by
      biting off his tongue.]
    </p>
<p>
      The total disregard of truth and probability in the representation of
      these primitive martyrdoms was occasioned by a very natural mistake. The
      ecclesiastical writers of the fourth or fifth centuries ascribed to the
      magistrates of Rome the same degree of implacable and unrelenting zeal
      which filled their own breasts against the heretics or the idolaters of
      their own times.
    </p>
<p>
      It is not improbable that some of those persons who were raised to the
      dignities of the empire, might have imbibed the prejudices of the
      populace, and that the cruel disposition of others might occasionally be
      stimulated by motives of avarice or of personal resentment. <a href="#Blinknote-66" id="Blinknoteref-66" name="Blinknoteref-66">66</a> But
      it is certain, and we may appeal to the grateful confessions of the first
      Christians, that the greatest part of those magistrates who exercised in
      the provinces the authority of the emperor, or of the senate, and to whose
      hands alone the jurisdiction of life and death was intrusted, behaved like
      men of polished manners and liberal education, who respected the rules of
      justice, and who were conversant with the precepts of philosophy. They
      frequently declined the odious task of persecution, dismissed the charge
      with contempt, or suggested to the accused Christian some legal evasion,
      by which he might elude the severity of the laws. <a href="#Blinknote-67" id="Blinknoteref-67" name="Blinknoteref-67">67</a> Whenever they were
      invested with a discretionary power, <a href="#Blinknote-68" id="Blinknoteref-68" name="Blinknoteref-68">68</a> they used it much less
      for the oppression, than for the relief and benefit of the afflicted
      church. They were far from condemning all the Christians who were accused
      before their tribunal, and very far from punishing with death all those
      who were convicted of an obstinate adherence to the new superstition.
      Contenting themselves, for the most part, with the milder chastisements of
      imprisonment, exile, or slavery in the mines, <a href="#Blinknote-69" id="Blinknoteref-69" name="Blinknoteref-69">69</a> they left the unhappy
      victims of their justice some reason to hope, that a prosperous event, the
      accession, the marriage, or the triumph of an emperor, might speedily
      restore them, by a general pardon, to their former state. The martyrs,
      devoted to immediate execution by the Roman magistrates, appear to have
      been selected from the most opposite extremes. They were either bishops
      and presbyters, the persons the most distinguished among the Christians by
      their rank and influence, and whose example might strike terror into the
      whole sect; <a href="#Blinknote-70" id="Blinknoteref-70" name="Blinknoteref-70">70</a> or else they were the meanest and most abject
      among them, particularly those of the servile condition, whose lives were
      esteemed of little value, and whose sufferings were viewed by the ancients
      with too careless an indifference. <a href="#Blinknote-71" id="Blinknoteref-71" name="Blinknoteref-71">71</a> The learned Origen, who,
      from his experience as well as reading, was intimately acquainted with the
      history of the Christians, declares, in the most express terms, that the
      number of martyrs was very inconsiderable. <a href="#Blinknote-72" id="Blinknoteref-72" name="Blinknoteref-72">72</a> His authority would alone
      be sufficient to annihilate that formidable army of martyrs, whose relics,
      drawn for the most part from the catacombs of Rome, have replenished so
      many churches, <a href="#Blinknote-73" id="Blinknoteref-73" name="Blinknoteref-73">73</a> and whose marvellous achievements have been the
      subject of so many volumes of Holy Romance. <a href="#Blinknote-74" id="Blinknoteref-74" name="Blinknoteref-74">74</a> But the general assertion
      of Origen may be explained and confirmed by the particular testimony of
      his friend Dionysius, who, in the immense city of Alexandria, and under
      the rigorous persecution of Decius, reckons only ten men and seven women
      who suffered for the profession of the Christian name. <a href="#Blinknote-75" id="Blinknoteref-75" name="Blinknoteref-75">75</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-66" name="Blinknote-66">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      66 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-66">return</a>)<br/> [ The conversion of his
      wife provoked Claudius Herminianus, governor of Cappadocia, to treat the
      Christians with uncommon severity. Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 3.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-67" name="Blinknote-67">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      67 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-67">return</a>)<br/> [ Tertullian, in his
      epistle to the governor of Africa, mentions several remarkable instances
      of lenity and forbearance, which had happened within his knowledge.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-68" name="Blinknote-68">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      68 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-68">return</a>)<br/> [ Neque enim in universum
      aliquid quod quasi certam formam habeat, constitui potest; an expression
      of Trajan, which gave a very great latitude to the governors of provinces.
      * Note: Gibbon altogether forgets that Trajan fully approved of the course
      pursued by Pliny. That course was, to order all who persevered in their
      faith to be led to execution: perseverantes duci jussi.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-69" name="Blinknote-69">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      69 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-69">return</a>)<br/> [ In Metalla damnamur, in
      insulas relegamur. Tertullian, Apolog. c. 12. The mines of Numidia
      contained nine bishops, with a proportionable number of their clergy and
      people, to whom Cyprian addressed a pious epistle of praise and comfort.
      See Cyprian. Epistol. 76, 77.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-70" name="Blinknote-70">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      70 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-70">return</a>)<br/> [ Though we cannot receive
      with entire confidence either the epistles, or the acts, of Ignatius,
      (they may be found in the 2d volume of the Apostolic Fathers,) yet we may
      quote that bishop of Antioch as one of these exemplary martyrs. He was
      sent in chains to Rome as a public spectacle, and when he arrived at
      Troas, he received the pleasing intelligence, that the persecution of
      Antioch was already at an end. * Note: The acts of Ignatius are generally
      received as authentic, as are seven of his letters. Eusebius and St.
      Jerome mention them: there are two editions; in one, the letters are
      longer, and many passages appear to have been interpolated; the other
      edition is that which contains the real letters of St. Ignatius; such at
      least is the opinion of the wisest and most enlightened critics. (See
      Lardner. Cred. of Gospel Hist.) Less, uber dis Religion, v. i. p. 529.
      Usser. Diss. de Ign. Epist. Pearson, Vindic, Ignatianae. It should be
      remarked, that it was under the reign of Trajan that the bishop Ignatius
      was carried from Antioch to Rome, to be exposed to the lions in the
      amphitheatre, the year of J. C. 107, according to some; of 116, according
      to others.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-71" name="Blinknote-71">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      71 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-71">return</a>)<br/> [ Among the martyrs of
      Lyons, (Euseb. l. v. c. 1,) the slave Blandina was distinguished by more
      exquisite tortures. Of the five martyrs so much celebrated in the acts of
      Felicitas and Perpetua, two were of a servile, and two others of a very
      mean, condition.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-72" name="Blinknote-72">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      72 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-72">return</a>)<br/> [ Origen. advers. Celsum,
      l. iii. p. 116. His words deserve to be transcribed. * Note: The words
      that follow should be quoted. "God not permitting that all his class of
      men should be exterminated:" which appears to indicate that Origen thought
      the number put to death inconsiderable only when compared to the numbers
      who had survived. Besides this, he is speaking of the state of the
      religion under Caracalla, Elagabalus, Alexander Severus, and Philip, who
      had not persecuted the Christians. It was during the reign of the latter
      that Origen wrote his books against Celsus.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-73" name="Blinknote-73">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      73 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-73">return</a>)<br/> [ If we recollect that all
      the Plebeians of Rome were not Christians, and that all the Christians
      were not saints and martyrs, we may judge with how much safety religious
      honors can be ascribed to bones or urns, indiscriminately taken from the
      public burial-place. After ten centuries of a very free and open trade,
      some suspicions have arisen among the more learned Catholics. They now
      require as a proof of sanctity and martyrdom, the letters B.M., a vial
      full of red liquor supposed to be blood, or the figure of a palm-tree. But
      the two former signs are of little weight, and with regard to the last, it
      is observed by the critics, 1. That the figure, as it is called, of a
      palm, is perhaps a cypress, and perhaps only a stop, the flourish of a
      comma used in the monumental inscriptions. 2. That the palm was the symbol
      of victory among the Pagans. 3. That among the Christians it served as the
      emblem, not only of martyrdom, but in general of a joyful resurrection.
      See the epistle of P. Mabillon, on the worship of unknown saints, and
      Muratori sopra le Antichita Italiane, Dissertat. lviii.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-74" name="Blinknote-74">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      74 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-74">return</a>)<br/> [ As a specimen of these
      legends, we may be satisfied with 10,000 Christian soldiers crucified in
      one day, either by Trajan or Hadrian on Mount Ararat. See Baronius ad
      Martyrologium Romanum; Tille mont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. ii. part ii. p.
      438; and Geddes's Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 203. The abbreviation of Mil.,
      which may signify either soldiers or thousands, is said to have occasioned
      some extraordinary mistakes.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-75" name="Blinknote-75">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      75 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-75">return</a>)<br/> [ Dionysius ap. Euseb l.
      vi. c. 41 One of the seventeen was likewise accused of robbery. * Note:
      Gibbon ought to have said, was falsely accused of robbery, for so it is in
      the Greek text. This Christian, named Nemesion, falsely accused of robbery
      before the centurion, was acquitted of a crime altogether foreign to his
      character, but he was led before the governor as guilty of being a
      Christian, and the governor inflicted upon him a double torture. (Euseb.
      loc. cit.) It must be added, that Saint Dionysius only makes particular
      mention of the principal martyrs, [this is very doubtful.—M.] and
      that he says, in general, that the fury of the Pagans against the
      Christians gave to Alexandria the appearance of a city taken by storm.
      [This refers to plunder and ill usage, not to actual slaughter.—M.]
      Finally it should be observed that Origen wrote before the persecution of
      the emperor Decius.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      During the same period of persecution, the zealous, the eloquent, the
      ambitious Cyprian governed the church, not only of Carthage, but even of
      Africa. He possessed every quality which could engage the reverence of the
      faithful, or provoke the suspicions and resentment of the Pagan
      magistrates. His character as well as his station seemed to mark out that
      holy prelate as the most distinguished object of envy and danger. <a href="#Blinknote-76" id="Blinknoteref-76" name="Blinknoteref-76">76</a> The
      experience, however, of the life of Cyprian, is sufficient to prove that
      our fancy has exaggerated the perilous situation of a Christian bishop;
      and the dangers to which he was exposed were less imminent than those
      which temporal ambition is always prepared to encounter in the pursuit of
      honors. Four Roman emperors, with their families, their favorites, and
      their adherents, perished by the sword in the space of ten years, during
      which the bishop of Carthage guided by his authority and eloquence the
      councils of the African church. It was only in the third year of his
      administration, that he had reason, during a few months, to apprehend the
      severe edicts of Decius, the vigilance of the magistrate and the clamors
      of the multitude, who loudly demanded, that Cyprian, the leader of the
      Christians, should be thrown to the lions. Prudence suggested the
      necessity of a temporary retreat, and the voice of prudence was obeyed. He
      withdrew himself into an obscure solitude, from whence he could maintain a
      constant correspondence with the clergy and people of Carthage; and,
      concealing himself till the tempest was past, he preserved his life,
      without relinquishing either his power or his reputation. His extreme
      caution did not, however, escape the censure of the more rigid Christians,
      who lamented, or the reproaches of his personal enemies, who insulted, a
      conduct which they considered as a pusillanimous and criminal desertion of
      the most sacred duty. <a href="#Blinknote-77" id="Blinknoteref-77" name="Blinknoteref-77">77</a> The propriety of reserving himself for the
      future exigencies of the church, the example of several holy bishops, <a href="#Blinknote-78" id="Blinknoteref-78" name="Blinknoteref-78">78</a> and
      the divine admonitions, which, as he declares himself, he frequently
      received in visions and ecstacies, were the reasons alleged in his
      justification. <a href="#Blinknote-79" id="Blinknoteref-79" name="Blinknoteref-79">79</a> But his best apology may be found in the
      cheerful resolution, with which, about eight years afterwards, he suffered
      death in the cause of religion. The authentic history of his martyrdom has
      been recorded with unusual candor and impartiality. A short abstract,
      therefore, of its most important circumstances, will convey the clearest
      information of the spirit, and of the forms, of the Roman persecutions. <a href="#Blinknote-80" id="Blinknoteref-80" name="Blinknoteref-80">80</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-76" name="Blinknote-76">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      76 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-76">return</a>)<br/> [ The letters of Cyprian
      exhibit a very curious and original picture both of the man and of the
      times. See likewise the two lives of Cyprian, composed with equal
      accuracy, though with very different views; the one by Le Clerc
      (Bibliotheque Universelle, tom. xii. p. 208-378,) the other by Tillemont,
      Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. iv part i. p. 76-459.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-77" name="Blinknote-77">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      77 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-77">return</a>)<br/> [ See the polite but severe
      epistle of the clergy of Rome to the bishop of Carthage. (Cyprian. Epist.
      8, 9.) Pontius labors with the greatest care and diligence to justify his
      master against the general censure.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-78" name="Blinknote-78">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      78 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-78">return</a>)<br/> [ In particular those of
      Dionysius of Alexandria, and Gregory Thaumaturgus, of Neo-Caesarea. See
      Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 40; and Memoires de Tillemont, tom. iv.
      part ii. p. 685.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-79" name="Blinknote-79">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      79 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-79">return</a>)<br/> [ See Cyprian. Epist. 16,
      and his life by Pontius.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-80" name="Blinknote-80">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      80 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-80">return</a>)<br/> [ We have an original life
      of Cyprian by the deacon Pontius, the companion of his exile, and the
      spectator of his death; and we likewise possess the ancient proconsular
      acts of his martyrdom. These two relations are consistent with each other,
      and with probability; and what is somewhat remarkable, they are both
      unsullied by any miraculous circumstances.]
    </p>
<p>
      When Valerian was consul for the third, and Gallienus for the fourth time,
      Paternus, proconsul of Africa, summoned Cyprian to appear in his private
      council-chamber. He there acquainted him with the Imperial mandate which
      he had just received, <a href="#Blinknote-81" id="Blinknoteref-81" name="Blinknoteref-81">81</a> that those who had abandoned the Roman religion
      should immediately return to the practice of the ceremonies of their
      ancestors. Cyprian replied without hesitation, that he was a Christian and
      a bishop, devoted to the worship of the true and only Deity, to whom he
      offered up his daily supplications for the safety and prosperity of the
      two emperors, his lawful sovereigns.
    </p>
<p>
      With modest confidence he pleaded the privilege of a citizen, in refusing
      to give any answer to some invidious and indeed illegal questions which
      the proconsul had proposed. A sentence of banishment was pronounced as the
      penalty of Cyprian's disobedience; and he was conducted without delay to
      Cœurubis, a free and maritime city of Zeugitania, in a pleasant situation,
      a fertile territory, and at the distance of about forty miles from
      Carthage. <a href="#Blinknote-82" id="Blinknoteref-82" name="Blinknoteref-82">82</a>
      The exiled bishop enjoyed the conveniences of life and the consciousness
      of virtue. His reputation was diffused over Africa and Italy; an account
      of his behavior was published for the edification of the Christian world;
      <a href="#Blinknote-83" id="Blinknoteref-83" name="Blinknoteref-83">83</a>
      and his solitude was frequently interrupted by the letters, the visits,
      and the congratulations of the faithful. On the arrival of a new proconsul
      in the province the fortune of Cyprian appeared for some time to wear a
      still more favorable aspect. He was recalled from banishment; and though
      not yet permitted to return to Carthage, his own gardens in the
      neighborhood of the capital were assigned for the place of his residence.
      <a href="#Blinknote-84" id="Blinknoteref-84" name="Blinknoteref-84">84</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-81" name="Blinknote-81">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      81 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-81">return</a>)<br/> [ It should seem that these
      were circular orders, sent at the same time to all the governors.
      Dionysius (ap. Euseb. l. vii. c. 11) relates the history of his own
      banishment from Alexandria almost in the same manner. But as he escaped
      and survived the persecution, we must account him either more or less
      fortunate than Cyprian.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-82" name="Blinknote-82">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      82 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-82">return</a>)<br/> [ See Plin. Hist. Natur. v.
      3. Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq. part iii. p. 96. Shaw's Travels, p. 90; and
      for the adjacent country, (which is terminated by Cape Bona, or the
      promontory of Mercury,) l'Afrique de Marmol. tom. ii. p. 494. There are
      the remains of an aqueduct near Cœurubis, or Cœurbis, at present altered
      into Gurbes; and Dr. Shaw read an inscription, which styles that city
      Colonia Fulvia. The deacon Pontius (in Vit. Cyprian. c. 12) calls it
      "Apricum et competentem locum, hospitium pro voluntate secretum, et
      quicquid apponi eis ante promissum est, qui regnum et justitiam Dei
      quaerunt."]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-83" name="Blinknote-83">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      83 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-83">return</a>)<br/> [ See Cyprian. Epistol. 77,
      edit. Fell.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-84" name="Blinknote-84">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      84 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-84">return</a>)<br/> [ Upon his conversion, he
      had sold those gardens for the benefit of the poor. The indulgence of God
      (most probably the liberality of some Christian friend) restored them to
      Cyprian. See Pontius, c. 15.]
    </p>
<p>
      At length, exactly one year <a href="#Blinknote-85" id="Blinknoteref-85" name="Blinknoteref-85">85</a> after Cyprian was first apprehended, Galerius
      Maximus, proconsul of Africa, received the Imperial warrant for the
      execution of the Christian teachers. The bishop of Carthage was sensible
      that he should be singled out for one of the first victims; and the
      frailty of nature tempted him to withdraw himself, by a secret flight,
      from the danger and the honor of martyrdom; <a href="#Blinknote-8511" id="Blinknoteref-8511" name="Blinknoteref-8511">8511</a> but soon recovering
      that fortitude which his character required, he returned to his gardens,
      and patiently expected the ministers of death. Two officers of rank, who
      were intrusted with that commission, placed Cyprian between them in a
      chariot, and as the proconsul was not then at leisure, they conducted him,
      not to a prison, but to a private house in Carthage, which belonged to one
      of them. An elegant supper was provided for the entertainment of the
      bishop, and his Christian friends were permitted for the last time to
      enjoy his society, whilst the streets were filled with a multitude of the
      faithful, anxious and alarmed at the approaching fate of their spiritual
      father. <a href="#Blinknote-86" id="Blinknoteref-86" name="Blinknoteref-86">86</a>
      In the morning he appeared before the tribunal of the proconsul, who,
      after informing himself of the name and situation of Cyprian, commanded
      him to offer sacrifice, and pressed him to reflect on the consequences of
      his disobedience. The refusal of Cyprian was firm and decisive; and the
      magistrate, when he had taken the opinion of his council, pronounced with
      some reluctance the sentence of death. It was conceived in the following
      terms: "That Thascius Cyprianus should be immediately beheaded, as the
      enemy of the gods of Rome, and as the chief and ringleader of a criminal
      association, which he had seduced into an impious resistance against the
      laws of the most holy emperors, Valerian and Gallienus." <a href="#Blinknote-87" id="Blinknoteref-87" name="Blinknoteref-87">87</a> The
      manner of his execution was the mildest and least painful that could be
      inflicted on a person convicted of any capital offence; nor was the use of
      torture admitted to obtain from the bishop of Carthage either the
      recantation of his principles or the discovery of his accomplices.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-85" name="Blinknote-85">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      85 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-85">return</a>)<br/> [ When Cyprian; a
      twelvemonth before, was sent into exile, he dreamt that he should be put
      to death the next day. The event made it necessary to explain that word,
      as signifying a year. Pontius, c. 12.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-8511" name="Blinknote-8511">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8511 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-8511">return</a>)<br/> [ This was not, as it
      appears, the motive which induced St. Cyprian to conceal himself for a
      short time; he was threatened to be carried to Utica; he preferred
      remaining at Carthage, in order to suffer martyrdom in the midst of his
      flock, and in order that his death might conduce to the edification of
      those whom he had guided during life. Such, at least, is his own
      explanation of his conduct in one of his letters: Cum perlatum ad nos
      fuisset, fratres carissimi, frumentarios esse missos qui me Uticam per
      ducerent, consilioque carissimorum persuasum est, ut de hortis interim
      recederemus, justa interveniente causa, consensi; eo quod congruat
      episcopum in ea civitate, in qua Ecclesiae dominicae praeest, illie.
      Dominum confiteri et plebem universam praepositi praesentis confessione
      clarificari Ep. 83.—G]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-86" name="Blinknote-86">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      86 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-86">return</a>)<br/> [ Pontius (c. 15)
      acknowledges that Cyprian, with whom he supped, passed the night custodia
      delicata. The bishop exercised a last and very proper act of jurisdiction,
      by directing that the younger females, who watched in the streets, should
      be removed from the dangers and temptations of a nocturnal crowd. Act.
      Preconsularia, c. 2.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-87" name="Blinknote-87">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      87 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-87">return</a>)<br/> [ See the original sentence
      in the Acts, c. 4; and in Pontius, c. 17 The latter expresses it in a more
      rhetorical manner.]
    </p>
<p>
      As soon as the sentence was proclaimed, a general cry of "We will die with
      him," arose at once among the listening multitude of Christians who waited
      before the palace gates. The generous effusions of their zeal and their
      affection were neither serviceable to Cyprian nor dangerous to themselves.
      He was led away under a guard of tribunes and centurions, without
      resistance and without insult, to the place of his execution, a spacious
      and level plain near the city, which was already filled with great numbers
      of spectators. His faithful presbyters and deacons were permitted to
      accompany their holy bishop. <a href="#Blinknote-8711" id="Blinknoteref-8711" name="Blinknoteref-8711">8711</a> They assisted him
      in laying aside his upper garment, spread linen on the ground to catch the
      precious relics of his blood, and received his orders to bestow
      five-and-twenty pieces of gold on the executioner. The martyr then covered
      his face with his hands, and at one blow his head was separated from his
      body. His corpse remained during some hours exposed to the curiosity of
      the Gentiles: but in the night it was removed, and transported in a
      triumphal procession, and with a splendid illumination, to the
      burial-place of the Christians. The funeral of Cyprian was publicly
      celebrated without receiving any interruption from the Roman magistrates;
      and those among the faithful, who had performed the last offices to his
      person and his memory, were secure from the danger of inquiry or of
      punishment. It is remarkable, that of so great a multitude of bishops in
      the province of Africa, Cyprian was the first who was esteemed worthy to
      obtain the crown of martyrdom. <a href="#Blinknote-88" id="Blinknoteref-88" name="Blinknoteref-88">88</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-8711" name="Blinknote-8711">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8711 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-8711">return</a>)<br/> [ There is nothing in
      the life of St. Cyprian, by Pontius, nor in the ancient manuscripts, which
      can make us suppose that the presbyters and deacons in their clerical
      character, and known to be such, had the permission to attend their holy
      bishop. Setting aside all religious considerations, it is impossible not
      to be surprised at the kind of complaisance with which the historian here
      insists, in favor of the persecutors, on some mitigating circumstances
      allowed at the death of a man whose only crime was maintaining his own
      opinions with frankness and courage.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-88" name="Blinknote-88">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      88 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-88">return</a>)<br/> [ Pontius, c. 19. M. de
      Tillemont (Memoires, tom. iv. part i. p. 450, note 50) is not pleased with
      so positive an exclusion of any former martyr of the episcopal rank. *
      Note: M. de. Tillemont, as an honest writer, explains the difficulties
      which he felt about the text of Pontius, and concludes by distinctly
      stating, that without doubt there is some mistake, and that Pontius must
      have meant only Africa Minor or Carthage; for St. Cyprian, in his 58th
      (69th) letter addressed to Pupianus, speaks expressly of many bishops his
      colleagues, qui proscripti sunt, vel apprehensi in carcere et catenis
      fuerunt; aut qui in exilium relegati, illustri itinere ed Dominum profecti
      sunt; aut qui quibusdam locis animadversi, coeleses coronas de Domini
      clarificatione sumpserunt.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      It was in the choice of Cyprian, either to die a martyr, or to live an
      apostate; but on the choice depended the alternative of honor or infamy.
      Could we suppose that the bishop of Carthage had employed the profession
      of the Christian faith only as the instrument of his avarice or ambition,
      it was still incumbent on him to support the character he had assumed; <a href="#Blinknote-89" id="Blinknoteref-89" name="Blinknoteref-89">89</a> and
      if he possessed the smallest degree of manly fortitude, rather to expose
      himself to the most cruel tortures, than by a single act to exchange the
      reputation of a whole life, for the abhorrence of his Christian brethren,
      and the contempt of the Gentile world. But if the zeal of Cyprian was
      supported by the sincere conviction of the truth of those doctrines which
      he preached, the crown of martyrdom must have appeared to him as an object
      of desire rather than of terror. It is not easy to extract any distinct
      ideas from the vague though eloquent declamations of the Fathers, or to
      ascertain the degree of immortal glory and happiness which they
      confidently promised to those who were so fortunate as to shed their blood
      in the cause of religion. <a href="#Blinknote-90" id="Blinknoteref-90" name="Blinknoteref-90">90</a> They inculcated with becoming diligence, that
      the fire of martyrdom supplied every defect and expiated every sin; that
      while the souls of ordinary Christians were obliged to pass through a slow
      and painful purification, the triumphant sufferers entered into the
      immediate fruition of eternal bliss, where, in the society of the
      patriarchs, the apostles, and the prophets, they reigned with Christ, and
      acted as his assessors in the universal judgment of mankind. The assurance
      of a lasting reputation upon earth, a motive so congenial to the vanity of
      human nature, often served to animate the courage of the martyrs.
    </p>
<p>
      The honors which Rome or Athens bestowed on those citizens who had fallen
      in the cause of their country, were cold and unmeaning demonstrations of
      respect, when compared with the ardent gratitude and devotion which the
      primitive church expressed towards the victorious champions of the faith.
      The annual commemoration of their virtues and sufferings was observed as a
      sacred ceremony, and at length terminated in religious worship. Among the
      Christians who had publicly confessed their religious principles, those
      who (as it very frequently happened) had been dismissed from the tribunal
      or the prisons of the Pagan magistrates, obtained such honors as were
      justly due to their imperfect martyrdom and their generous resolution. The
      most pious females courted the permission of imprinting kisses on the
      fetters which they had worn, and on the wounds which they had received.
      Their persons were esteemed holy, their decisions were admitted with
      deference, and they too often abused, by their spiritual pride and
      licentious manners, the preeminence which their zeal and intrepidity had
      acquired. <a href="#Blinknote-91" id="Blinknoteref-91" name="Blinknoteref-91">91</a>
      Distinctions like these, whilst they display the exalted merit, betray the
      inconsiderable number of those who suffered, and of those who died, for
      the profession of Christianity.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-89" name="Blinknote-89">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      89 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-89">return</a>)<br/> [ Whatever opinion we may
      entertain of the character or principles of Thomas Becket, we must
      acknowledge that he suffered death with a constancy not unworthy of the
      primitive martyrs. See Lord Lyttleton's History of Henry II. vol. ii. p.
      592, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-90" name="Blinknote-90">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      90 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-90">return</a>)<br/> [ See in particular the
      treatise of Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 87-98, edit. Fell. The learning of
      Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprianic. xii. xiii.,) and the ingenuity of
      Middleton, (Free Inquiry, p. 162, &amp;c.,) have left scarcely any thing
      to add concerning the merit, the honors, and the motives of the martyrs.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-91" name="Blinknote-91">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      91 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-91">return</a>)<br/> [ Cyprian. Epistol. 5, 6,
      7, 22, 24; and de Unitat. Ecclesiae. The number of pretended martyrs has
      been very much multiplied, by the custom which was introduced of bestowing
      that honorable name on confessors. Note: M. Guizot denies that the letters
      of Cyprian, to which he refers, bear out the statement in the text. I
      cannot scruple to admit the accuracy of Gibbon's quotation. To take only
      the fifth letter, we find this passage: Doleo enim quando audio quosdam
      improbe et insolenter discurrere, et ad ineptian vel ad discordias vacare,
      Christi membra et jam Christum confessa per concubitus illicitos
      inquinari, nec a diaconis aut presbyteris regi posse, sed id agere ut per
      paucorum pravos et malos mores, multorum et bonorum confessorum gloria
      honesta maculetur. Gibbon's misrepresentation lies in the ambiguous
      expression "too often." Were the epistles arranged in a different manner
      in the edition consulted by M. Guizot?—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The sober discretion of the present age will more readily censure than
      admire, but can more easily admire than imitate, the fervor of the first
      Christians, who, according to the lively expressions of Sulpicius Severus,
      desired martyrdom with more eagerness than his own contemporaries
      solicited a bishopric. <a href="#Blinknote-92" id="Blinknoteref-92" name="Blinknoteref-92">92</a> The epistles which Ignatius composed as he was
      carried in chains through the cities of Asia, breathe sentiments the most
      repugnant to the ordinary feelings of human nature. He earnestly beseeches
      the Romans, that when he should be exposed in the amphitheatre, they would
      not, by their kind but unseasonable intercession, deprive him of the crown
      of glory; and he declares his resolution to provoke and irritate the wild
      beasts which might be employed as the instruments of his death. <a href="#Blinknote-93" id="Blinknoteref-93" name="Blinknoteref-93">93</a> Some
      stories are related of the courage of martyrs, who actually performed what
      Ignatius had intended; who exasperated the fury of the lions, pressed the
      executioner to hasten his office, cheerfully leaped into the fires which
      were kindled to consume them, and discovered a sensation of joy and
      pleasure in the midst of the most exquisite tortures. Several examples
      have been preserved of a zeal impatient of those restraints which the
      emperors had provided for the security of the church. The Christians
      sometimes supplied by their voluntary declaration the want of an accuser,
      rudely disturbed the public service of paganism, <a href="#Blinknote-94" id="Blinknoteref-94" name="Blinknoteref-94">94</a> and rushing in crowds
      round the tribunal of the magistrates, called upon them to pronounce and
      to inflict the sentence of the law. The behavior of the Christians was too
      remarkable to escape the notice of the ancient philosophers; but they seem
      to have considered it with much less admiration than astonishment.
      Incapable of conceiving the motives which sometimes transported the
      fortitude of believers beyond the bounds of prudence or reason, they
      treated such an eagerness to die as the strange result of obstinate
      despair, of stupid insensibility, or of superstitious frenzy. <a href="#Blinknote-95" id="Blinknoteref-95" name="Blinknoteref-95">95</a>
      "Unhappy men!" exclaimed the proconsul Antoninus to the Christians of
      Asia; "unhappy men! if you are thus weary of your lives, is it so
      difficult for you to find ropes and precipices?" <a href="#Blinknote-96" id="Blinknoteref-96" name="Blinknoteref-96">96</a> He was extremely cautious
      (as it is observed by a learned and picus historian) of punishing men who
      had found no accusers but themselves, the Imperial laws not having made
      any provision for so unexpected a case: condemning therefore a few as a
      warning to their brethren, he dismissed the multitude with indignation and
      contempt. <a href="#Blinknote-97" id="Blinknoteref-97" name="Blinknoteref-97">97</a>
      Notwithstanding this real or affected disdain, the intrepid constancy of
      the faithful was productive of more salutary effects on those minds which
      nature or grace had disposed for the easy reception of religious truth. On
      these melancholy occasions, there were many among the Gentiles who pitied,
      who admired, and who were converted. The generous enthusiasm was
      communicated from the sufferer to the spectators; and the blood of
      martyrs, according to a well-known observation, became the seed of the
      church.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-92" name="Blinknote-92">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      92 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-92">return</a>)<br/> [ Certatim gloriosa in
      certamina ruebatur; multique avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus
      quaerebantur, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur.
      Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. He might have omitted the word nunc.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-93" name="Blinknote-93">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      93 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-93">return</a>)<br/> [ See Epist. ad Roman. c.
      4, 5, ap. Patres Apostol. tom. ii. p. 27. It suited the purpose of Bishop
      Pearson (see Vindiciae Ignatianae, part ii. c. 9) to justify, by a
      profusion of examples and authorities, the sentiments of Ignatius.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-94" name="Blinknote-94">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      94 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-94">return</a>)<br/> [ The story of Polyeuctes,
      on which Corneille has founded a very beautiful tragedy, is one of the
      most celebrated, though not perhaps the most authentic, instances of this
      excessive zeal. We should observe, that the 60th canon of the council of
      Illiberis refuses the title of martyrs to those who exposed themselves to
      death, by publicly destroying the idols.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-95" name="Blinknote-95">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      95 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-95">return</a>)<br/> [ See Epictetus, l. iv. c.
      7, (though there is some doubt whether he alludes to the Christians.)
      Marcus Antoninus de Rebus suis, l. xi. c. 3 Lucian in Peregrin.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-96" name="Blinknote-96">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      96 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-96">return</a>)<br/> [ Tertullian ad Scapul. c.
      5. The learned are divided between three persons of the same name, who
      were all proconsuls of Asia. I am inclined to ascribe this story to
      Antoninus Pius, who was afterwards emperor; and who may have governed Asia
      under the reign of Trajan.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-97" name="Blinknote-97">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      97 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-97">return</a>)<br/> [ Mosheim, de Rebus Christ,
      ante Constantin. p. 235.]
    </p>
<p>
      But although devotion had raised, and eloquence continued to inflame, this
      fever of the mind, it insensibly gave way to the more natural hopes and
      fears of the human heart, to the love of life, the apprehension of pain,
      and the horror of dissolution. The more prudent rulers of the church found
      themselves obliged to restrain the indiscreet ardor of their followers,
      and to distrust a constancy which too often abandoned them in the hour of
      trial. <a href="#Blinknote-98" id="Blinknoteref-98" name="Blinknoteref-98">98</a>
      As the lives of the faithful became less mortified and austere, they were
      every day less ambitious of the honors of martyrdom; and the soldiers of
      Christ, instead of distinguishing themselves by voluntary deeds of
      heroism, frequently deserted their post, and fled in confusion before the
      enemy whom it was their duty to resist. There were three methods, however,
      of escaping the flames of persecution, which were not attended with an
      equal degree of guilt: first, indeed, was generally allowed to be
      innocent; the second was of a doubtful, or at least of a venial, nature;
      but the third implied a direct and criminal apostasy from the Christian
      faith.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-98" name="Blinknote-98">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      98 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-98">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Epistle of the
      Church of Smyrna, ap. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. Liv. c. 15 * Note: The 15th
      chapter of the 10th book of the Eccles. History of Eusebius treats
      principally of the martyrdom of St. Polycarp, and mentions some other
      martyrs. A single example of weakness is related; it is that of a Phrygian
      named Quintus, who, appalled at the sight of the wild beasts and the
      tortures, renounced his faith. This example proves little against the mass
      of Christians, and this chapter of Eusebius furnished much stronger
      evidence of their courage than of their timidity.—G——This
      Quintus had, however, rashly and of his own accord appeared before the
      tribunal; and the church of Smyrna condemn "his indiscreet ardor," coupled
      as it was with weakness in the hour of trial.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      I. A modern inquisitor would hear with surprise, that whenever an
      information was given to a Roman magistrate of any person within his
      jurisdiction who had embraced the sect of the Christians, the charge was
      communicated to the party accused, and that a convenient time was allowed
      him to settle his domestic concerns, and to prepare an answer to the crime
      which was imputed to him. <a href="#Blinknote-99" id="Blinknoteref-99" name="Blinknoteref-99">99</a> If he entertained any doubt of his own
      constancy, such a delay afforded him the opportunity of preserving his
      life and honor by flight, of withdrawing himself into some obscure
      retirement or some distant province, and of patiently expecting the return
      of peace and security. A measure so consonant to reason was soon
      authorized by the advice and example of the most holy prelates; and seems
      to have been censured by few except by the Montanists, who deviated into
      heresy by their strict and obstinate adherence to the rigor of ancient
      discipline. <a href="#Blinknote-100" id="Blinknoteref-100" name="Blinknoteref-100">100</a>
</p>
<p>
      II.The provincial governors, whose zeal was less prevalent than their
      avarice, had countenanced the practice of selling certificates, (or
      libels, as they were called,) which attested, that the persons therein
      mentioned had complied with the laws, and sacrificed to the Roman deities.
      By producing these false declarations, the opulent and timid Christians
      were enabled to silence the malice of an informer, and to reconcile in
      some measure their safety with their religion.<a href="#Blinknote-101" id="Blinknoteref-101" name="Blinknoteref-101">101</a> A slight penance
      atoned for this profane dissimulation. <a href="#Blinknote-1011" id="Blinknoteref-1011" name="Blinknoteref-1011">1011</a>
</p>
<p>
      III. In every persecution there were great numbers of unworthy Christians
      who publicly disowned or renounced the faith which they had professed; and
      who confirmed the sincerity of their abjuration, by the legal acts of
      burning incense or of offering sacrifices. Some of these apostates had
      yielded on the first menace or exhortation of the magistrate; whilst the
      patience of others had been subdued by the length and repetition of
      tortures. The affrighted countenances of some betrayed their inward
      remorse, while others advanced with confidence and alacrity to the altars
      of the gods. <a href="#Blinknote-102" id="Blinknoteref-102" name="Blinknoteref-102">102</a> But the disguise which fear had imposed,
      subsisted no longer than the present danger. As soon as the severity of
      the persecution was abated, the doors of the churches were assailed by the
      returning multitude of penitents who detested their idolatrous submission,
      and who solicited with equal ardor, but with various success, their
      readmission into the society of Christians. <a href="#Blinknote-103" id="Blinknoteref-103" name="Blinknoteref-103">103</a> <a href="#Blinknote-1031" id="Blinknoteref-1031" name="Blinknoteref-1031">1031</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-99" name="Blinknote-99">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      99 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-99">return</a>)<br/> [ In the second apology of
      Justin, there is a particular and very curious instance of this legal
      delay. The same indulgence was granted to accused Christians, in the
      persecution of Decius: and Cyprian (de Lapsis) expressly mentions the
      "Dies negantibus praestitutus." * Note: The examples drawn by the
      historian from Justin Martyr and Cyprian relate altogether to particular
      cases, and prove nothing as to the general practice adopted towards the
      accused; it is evident, on the contrary, from the same apology of St.
      Justin, that they hardly ever obtained delay. "A man named Lucius, himself
      a Christian, present at an unjust sentence passed against a Christian by
      the judge Urbicus, asked him why he thus punished a man who was neither
      adulterer nor robber, nor guilty of any other crime but that of avowing
      himself a Christian." Urbicus answered only in these words: "Thou also
      hast the appearance of being a Christian." "Yes, without doubt," replied
      Lucius. The judge ordered that he should be put to death on the instant. A
      third, who came up, was condemned to be beaten with rods. Here, then, are
      three examples where no delay was granted.——[Surely these acts
      of a single passionate and irritated judge prove the general practice as
      little as those quoted by Gibbon.—M.] There exist a multitude of
      others, such as those of Ptolemy, Marcellus, &amp;c. Justin expressly
      charges the judges with ordering the accused to be executed without
      hearing the cause. The words of St. Cyprian are as particular, and simply
      say, that he had appointed a day by which the Christians must have
      renounced their faith; those who had not done it by that time were
      condemned.—G. This confirms the statement in the text.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-100" name="Blinknote-100">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      100 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-100">return</a>)<br/> [ Tertullian considers
      flight from persecution as an imperfect, but very criminal, apostasy, as
      an impious attempt to elude the will of God, &amp;c., &amp;c. He has
      written a treatise on this subject, (see p. 536—544, edit. Rigalt.,)
      which is filled with the wildest fanaticism and the most incoherent
      declamation. It is, however, somewhat remarkable, that Tertullian did not
      suffer martyrdom himself.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-101" name="Blinknote-101">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      101 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-101">return</a>)<br/> [ The libellatici, who
      are chiefly known by the writings of Cyprian, are described with the
      utmost precision, in the copious commentary of Mosheim, p. 483—489.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1011" name="Blinknote-1011">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1011 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1011">return</a>)<br/> [ The penance was not
      so slight, for it was exactly the same with that of apostates who had
      sacrificed to idols; it lasted several years. See Fleun Hist. Ecc. v. ii.
      p. 171.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-102" name="Blinknote-102">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      102 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-102">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Epist. x. 97.
      Dionysius Alexandrin. ap. Euseb. l. vi. c. 41. Ad prima statim verba
      minantis inimici maximus fratrum numerus fidem suam prodidit: nec
      prostratus est persecutionis impetu, sed voluntario lapsu seipsum
      prostravit. Cyprian. Opera, p. 89. Among these deserters were many
      priests, and even bishops.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-103" name="Blinknote-103">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      103 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-103">return</a>)<br/> [ It was on this occasion
      that Cyprian wrote his treatise De Lapsis, and many of his epistles. The
      controversy concerning the treatment of penitent apostates, does not occur
      among the Christians of the preceding century. Shall we ascribe this to
      the superiority of their faith and courage, or to our less intimate
      knowledge of their history!]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1031" name="Blinknote-1031">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1031 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1031">return</a>)<br/> [ Pliny says, that the
      greater part of the Christians persisted in avowing themselves to be so;
      the reason for his consulting Trajan was the periclitantium numerus.
      Eusebius (l. vi. c. 41) does not permit us to doubt that the number of
      those who renounced their faith was infinitely below the number of those
      who boldly confessed it. The prefect, he says and his assessors present at
      the council, were alarmed at seeing the crowd of Christians; the judges
      themselves trembled. Lastly, St. Cyprian informs us, that the greater part
      of those who had appeared weak brethren in the persecution of Decius,
      signalized their courage in that of Gallius. Steterunt fortes, et ipso
      dolore poenitentiae facti ad praelium fortiores Epist. lx. p. 142.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      IV. Notwithstanding the general rules established for the conviction and
      punishment of the Christians, the fate of those sectaries, in an extensive
      and arbitrary government, must still in a great measure, have depended on
      their own behavior, the circumstances of the times, and the temper of
      their supreme as well as subordinate rulers. Zeal might sometimes provoke,
      and prudence might sometimes avert or assuage, the superstitious fury of
      the Pagans. A variety of motives might dispose the provincial governors
      either to enforce or to relax the execution of the laws; and of these
      motives the most forcible was their regard not only for the public edicts,
      but for the secret intentions of the emperor, a glance from whose eye was
      sufficient to kindle or to extinguish the flames of persecution. As often
      as any occasional severities were exercised in the different parts of the
      empire, the primitive Christians lamented and perhaps magnified their own
      sufferings; but the celebrated number of ten persecutions has been
      determined by the ecclesiastical writers of the fifth century, who
      possessed a more distinct view of the prosperous or adverse fortunes of
      the church, from the age of Nero to that of Diocletian. The ingenious
      parallels of the ten plagues of Egypt, and of the ten horns of the
      Apocalypse, first suggested this calculation to their minds; and in their
      application of the faith of prophecy to the truth of history, they were
      careful to select those reigns which were indeed the most hostile to the
      Christian cause. <a href="#Blinknote-104" id="Blinknoteref-104" name="Blinknoteref-104">104</a> But these transient persecutions served only
      to revive the zeal and to restore the discipline of the faithful; and the
      moments of extraordinary rigor were compensated by much longer intervals
      of peace and security. The indifference of some princes, and the
      indulgence of others, permitted the Christians to enjoy, though not
      perhaps a legal, yet an actual and public, toleration of their religion.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-104" name="Blinknote-104">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      104 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-104">return</a>)<br/> [ See Mosheim, p. 97.
      Sulpicius Severus was the first author of this computation; though he
      seemed desirous of reserving the tenth and greatest persecution for the
      coming of the Antichrist.]
    </p>
<p>
      The apology of Tertullian contains two very ancient, very singular, but at
      the same time very suspicious, instances of Imperial clemency; the edicts
      published by Tiberius, and by Marcus Antoninus, and designed not only to
      protect the innocence of the Christians, but even to proclaim those
      stupendous miracles which had attested the truth of their doctrine. The
      first of these examples is attended with some difficulties which might
      perplex a sceptical mind. <a href="#Blinknote-105" id="Blinknoteref-105" name="Blinknoteref-105">105</a> We are required to believe, that Pontius
      Pilate informed the emperor of the unjust sentence of death which he had
      pronounced against an innocent, and, as it appeared, a divine, person; and
      that, without acquiring the merit, he exposed himself to the danger of
      martyrdom; that Tiberius, who avowed his contempt for all religion,
      immediately conceived the design of placing the Jewish Messiah among the
      gods of Rome; that his servile senate ventured to disobey the commands of
      their master; that Tiberius, instead of resenting their refusal, contented
      himself with protecting the Christians from the severity of the laws, many
      years before such laws were enacted, or before the church had assumed any
      distinct name or existence; and lastly, that the memory of this
      extraordinary transaction was preserved in the most public and authentic
      records, which escaped the knowledge of the historians of Greece and Rome,
      and were only visible to the eyes of an African Christian, who composed
      his apology one hundred and sixty years after the death of Tiberius. The
      edict of Marcus Antoninus is supposed to have been the effect of his
      devotion and gratitude for the miraculous deliverance which he had
      obtained in the Marcomannic war. The distress of the legions, the
      seasonable tempest of rain and hail, of thunder and of lightning, and the
      dismay and defeat of the barbarians, have been celebrated by the eloquence
      of several Pagan writers. If there were any Christians in that army, it
      was natural that they should ascribe some merit to the fervent prayers,
      which, in the moment of danger, they had offered up for their own and the
      public safety. But we are still assured by monuments of brass and marble,
      by the Imperial medals, and by the Antonine column, that neither the
      prince nor the people entertained any sense of this signal obligation,
      since they unanimously attribute their deliverance to the providence of
      Jupiter, and to the interposition of Mercury. <a href="#Blinknote-106" id="Blinknoteref-106" name="Blinknoteref-106">106</a> During the whole
      course of his reign, Marcus despised the Christians as a philosopher, and
      punished them as a sovereign. <a href="#Blinknote-1061" id="Blinknoteref-1061" name="Blinknoteref-1061">1061</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-105" name="Blinknote-105">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      105 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-105">return</a>)<br/> [ The testimony given by
      Pontius Pilate is first mentioned by Justin. The successive improvements
      which the story acquired (as if has passed through the hands of
      Tertullian, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Orosius, Gregory of Tours,
      and the authors of the several editions of the acts of Pilate) are very
      fairly stated by Dom Calmet Dissertat. sur l'Ecriture, tom. iii. p. 651,
      &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-106" name="Blinknote-106">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      106 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-106">return</a>)<br/> [ On this miracle, as it
      is commonly called, of the thundering legion, see the admirable criticism
      of Mr. Moyle, in his Works, vol. ii. p. 81—390.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1061" name="Blinknote-1061">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1061 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1061">return</a>)<br/> [ Gibbon, with this
      phrase, and that below, which admits the injustice of Marcus, has
      dexterously glossed over one of the most remarkable facts in the early
      Christian history, that the reign of the wisest and most humane of the
      heathen emperors was the most fatal to the Christians. Most writers have
      ascribed the persecutions under Marcus to the latent bigotry of his
      character; Mosheim, to the influence of the philosophic party; but the
      fact is admitted by all. A late writer (Mr. Waddington, Hist. of the
      Church, p. 47) has not scrupled to assert, that "this prince polluted
      every year of a long reign with innocent blood;" but the causes as well as
      the date of the persecutions authorized or permitted by Marcus are equally
      uncertain. Of the Asiatic edict recorded by Melito. the date is unknown,
      nor is it quite clear that it was an Imperial edict. If it was the act
      under which Polycarp suffered, his martyrdom is placed by Ruinart in the
      sixth, by Mosheim in the ninth, year of the reign of Marcus. The martyrs
      of Vienne and Lyons are assigned by Dodwell to the seventh, by most
      writers to the seventeenth. In fact, the commencement of the persecutions
      of the Christians appears to synchronize exactly with the period of the
      breaking out of the Marcomannic war, which seems to have alarmed the whole
      empire, and the emperor himself, into a paroxysm of returning piety to
      their gods, of which the Christians were the victims. See Jul, Capit.
      Script. Hist August. p. 181, edit. 1661. It is remarkable that Tertullian
      (Apologet. c. v.) distinctly asserts that Verus (M. Aurelius) issued no
      edicts against the Christians, and almost positively exempts him from the
      charge of persecution.—M. This remarkable synchronism, which
      explains the persecutions under M Aurelius, is shown at length in Milman's
      History of Christianity, book ii. v.—M. 1845.]
    </p>
<p>
      By a singular fatality, the hardships which they had endured under the
      government of a virtuous prince, immediately ceased on the accession of a
      tyrant; and as none except themselves had experienced the injustice of
      Marcus, so they alone were protected by the lenity of Commodus. The
      celebrated Marcia, the most favored of his concubines, and who at length
      contrived the murder of her Imperial lover, entertained a singular
      affection for the oppressed church; and though it was impossible that she
      could reconcile the practice of vice with the precepts of the gospel, she
      might hope to atone for the frailties of her sex and profession by
      declaring herself the patroness of the Christians. <a href="#Blinknote-107" id="Blinknoteref-107" name="Blinknoteref-107">107</a> Under the gracious
      protection of Marcia, they passed in safety the thirteen years of a cruel
      tyranny; and when the empire was established in the house of Severus, they
      formed a domestic but more honorable connection with the new court. The
      emperor was persuaded, that in a dangerous sickness, he had derived some
      benefit, either spiritual or physical, from the holy oil, with which one
      of his slaves had anointed him. He always treated with peculiar
      distinction several persons of both sexes who had embraced the new
      religion. The nurse as well as the preceptor of Caracalla were Christians;
      <a href="#Blinknote-1071" id="Blinknoteref-1071" name="Blinknoteref-1071">1071</a>
      and if that young prince ever betrayed a sentiment of humanity, it was
      occasioned by an incident, which, however trifling, bore some relation to
      the cause of Christianity. <a href="#Blinknote-108" id="Blinknoteref-108" name="Blinknoteref-108">108</a> Under the reign of Severus, the fury of the
      populace was checked; the rigor of ancient laws was for some time
      suspended; and the provincial governors were satisfied with receiving an
      annual present from the churches within their jurisdiction, as the price,
      or as the reward, of their moderation. <a href="#Blinknote-109" id="Blinknoteref-109" name="Blinknoteref-109">109</a> The controversy
      concerning the precise time of the celebration of Easter, armed the
      bishops of Asia and Italy against each other, and was considered as the
      most important business of this period of leisure and tranquillity. <a href="#Blinknote-110" id="Blinknoteref-110" name="Blinknoteref-110">110</a>
      Nor was the peace of the church interrupted, till the increasing numbers
      of proselytes seem at length to have attracted the attention, and to have
      alienated the mind of Severus. With the design of restraining the progress
      of Christianity, he published an edict, which, though it was designed to
      affect only the new converts, could not be carried into strict execution,
      without exposing to danger and punishment the most zealous of their
      teachers and missionaries. In this mitigated persecution we may still
      discover the indulgent spirit of Rome and of Polytheism, which so readily
      admitted every excuse in favor of those who practised the religious
      ceremonies of their fathers. <a href="#Blinknote-111" id="Blinknoteref-111" name="Blinknoteref-111">111</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-107" name="Blinknote-107">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      107 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-107">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion Cassius, or rather
      his abbreviator Xiphilin, l. lxxii. p. 1206. Mr. Moyle (p. 266) has
      explained the condition of the church under the reign of Commodus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1071" name="Blinknote-1071">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1071 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1071">return</a>)<br/> [ The Jews and
      Christians contest the honor of having furnished a nurse is the fratricide
      son of Severus Caracalla. Hist. of Jews, iii. 158.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-108" name="Blinknote-108">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      108 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-108">return</a>)<br/> [ Compare the life of
      Caracalla in the Augustan History, with the epistle of Tertullian to
      Scapula. Dr. Jortin (Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 5,
      &amp;c.) considers the cure of Severus by the means of holy oil, with a
      strong desire to convert it into a miracle.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-109" name="Blinknote-109">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      109 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-109">return</a>)<br/> [ Tertullian de Fuga, c.
      13. The present was made during the feast of the Saturnalia; and it is a
      matter of serious concern to Tertullian, that the faithful should be
      confounded with the most infamous professions which purchased the
      connivance of the government.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-110" name="Blinknote-110">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      110 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-110">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. l. v. c. 23, 24.
      Mosheim, p. 435—447.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-111" name="Blinknote-111">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      111 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-111">return</a>)<br/> [ Judaeos fieri sub gravi
      poena vetuit. Idem etiam de Christianis sanxit. Hist. August. p. 70.]
    </p>
<p>
      But the laws which Severus had enacted soon expired with the authority of
      that emperor; and the Christians, after this accidental tempest, enjoyed a
      calm of thirty-eight years. <a href="#Blinknote-112" id="Blinknoteref-112" name="Blinknoteref-112">112</a> Till this period they had usually held their
      assemblies in private houses and sequestered places. They were now
      permitted to erect and consecrate convenient edifices for the purpose of
      religious worship; <a href="#Blinknote-113" id="Blinknoteref-113" name="Blinknoteref-113">113</a> to purchase lands, even at Rome itself, for
      the use of the community; and to conduct the elections of their
      ecclesiastical ministers in so public, but at the same time in so
      exemplary a manner, as to deserve the respectful attention of the
      Gentiles. <a href="#Blinknote-114" id="Blinknoteref-114" name="Blinknoteref-114">114</a> This long repose of the church was
      accompanied with dignity. The reigns of those princes who derived their
      extraction from the Asiatic provinces, proved the most favorable to the
      Christians; the eminent persons of the sect, instead of being reduced to
      implore the protection of a slave or concubine, were admitted into the
      palace in the honorable characters of priests and philosophers; and their
      mysterious doctrines, which were already diffused among the people,
      insensibly attracted the curiosity of their sovereign. When the empress
      Mammaea passed through Antioch, she expressed a desire of conversing with
      the celebrated Origen, the fame of whose piety and learning was spread
      over the East. Origen obeyed so flattering an invitation, and though he
      could not expect to succeed in the conversion of an artful and ambitious
      woman, she listened with pleasure to his eloquent exhortations, and
      honorably dismissed him to his retirement in Palestine. <a href="#Blinknote-115" id="Blinknoteref-115" name="Blinknoteref-115">115</a>
      The sentiments of Mammaea were adopted by her son Alexander, and the
      philosophic devotion of that emperor was marked by a singular but
      injudicious regard for the Christian religion. In his domestic chapel he
      placed the statues of Abraham, of Orpheus, of Apollonius, and of Christ,
      as an honor justly due to those respectable sages who had instructed
      mankind in the various modes of addressing their homage to the supreme and
      universal Deity. <a href="#Blinknote-116" id="Blinknoteref-116" name="Blinknoteref-116">116</a> A purer faith, as well as worship, was openly
      professed and practised among his household. Bishops, perhaps for the
      first time, were seen at court; and, after the death of Alexander, when
      the inhuman Maximin discharged his fury on the favorites and servants of
      his unfortunate benefactor, a great number of Christians of every rank and
      of both sexes, were involved in the promiscuous massacre, which, on their
      account, has improperly received the name of Persecution. <a href="#Blinknote-117" id="Blinknoteref-117" name="Blinknoteref-117">117</a>
<a href="#Blinknote-1171" id="Blinknoteref-1171" name="Blinknoteref-1171">1171</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-112" name="Blinknote-112">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      112 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-112">return</a>)<br/> [ Sulpicius Severus, l.
      ii. p. 384. This computation (allowing for a single exception) is
      confirmed by the history of Eusebius, and by the writings of Cyprian.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-113" name="Blinknote-113">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      113 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-113">return</a>)<br/> [ The antiquity of
      Christian churches is discussed by Tillemont, (Memoires Ecclesiastiques,
      tom. iii. part ii. p. 68-72,) and by Mr. Moyle, (vol. i. p. 378-398.) The
      former refers the first construction of them to the peace of Alexander
      Severus; the latter, to the peace of Gallienus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-114" name="Blinknote-114">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      114 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-114">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Augustan
      History, p. 130. The emperor Alexander adopted their method of publicly
      proposing the names of those persons who were candidates for ordination.
      It is true that the honor of this practice is likewise attributed to the
      Jews.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-115" name="Blinknote-115">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      115 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-115">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 21. Hieronym. de Script. Eccles. c. 54. Mammaea was
      styled a holy and pious woman, both by the Christians and the Pagans. From
      the former, therefore, it was impossible that she should deserve that
      honorable epithet.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-116" name="Blinknote-116">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      116 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-116">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Augustan
      History, p. 123. Mosheim (p. 465) seems to refine too much on the domestic
      religion of Alexander. His design of building a public temple to Christ,
      (Hist. August. p. 129,) and the objection which was suggested either to
      him, or in similar circumstances to Hadrian, appear to have no other
      foundation than an improbable report, invented by the Christians, and
      credulously adopted by an historian of the age of Constantine.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-117" name="Blinknote-117">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      117 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-117">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. l. vi. c. 28. It
      may be presumed that the success of the Christians had exasperated the
      increasing bigotry of the Pagans. Dion Cassius, who composed his history
      under the former reign, had most probably intended for the use of his
      master those counsels of persecution, which he ascribes to a better age,
      and to and to the favorite of Augustus. Concerning this oration of
      Maecenas, or rather of Dion, I may refer to my own unbiased opinion, (vol.
      i. c. 1, note 25,) and to the Abbe de la Bleterie (Memoires de l'Academie,
      tom. xxiv. p. 303 tom xxv. p. 432.) * Note: If this be the case, Dion
      Cassius must have known the Christians they must have been the subject of
      his particular attention, since the author supposes that he wished his
      master to profit by these "counsels of persecution." How are we to
      reconcile this necessary consequence with what Gibbon has said of the
      ignorance of Dion Cassius even of the name of the Christians? (c. xvi. n.
      24.) (Gibbon speaks of Dion's silence, not of his ignorance.—M) The
      supposition in this note is supported by no proof; it is probable that
      Dion Cassius has often designated the Christians by the name of Jews. See
      Dion Cassius, l. lxvii. c 14, lxviii. l—G. On this point I should
      adopt the view of Gibbon rather than that of M Guizot.—M]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1171" name="Blinknote-1171">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1171 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1171">return</a>)<br/> [ It is with good
      reason that this massacre has been called a persecution, for it lasted
      during the whole reign of Maximin, as may be seen in Eusebius. (l. vi. c.
      28.) Rufinus expressly confirms it: Tribus annis a Maximino persecutione
      commota, in quibus finem et persecutionis fecit et vitas Hist. l. vi. c.
      19.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      Notwithstanding the cruel disposition of Maximin, the effects of his
      resentment against the Christians were of a very local and temporary
      nature, and the pious Origen, who had been proscribed as a devoted victim,
      was still reserved to convey the truths of the gospel to the ear of
      monarchs. <a href="#Blinknote-118" id="Blinknoteref-118" name="Blinknoteref-118">118</a> He addressed several edifying letters to the
      emperor Philip, to his wife, and to his mother; and as soon as that
      prince, who was born in the neighborhood of Palestine, had usurped the
      Imperial sceptre, the Christians acquired a friend and a protector. The
      public and even partial favor of Philip towards the sectaries of the new
      religion, and his constant reverence for the ministers of the church, gave
      some color to the suspicion, which prevailed in his own times, that the
      emperor himself was become a convert to the faith; <a href="#Blinknote-119" id="Blinknoteref-119" name="Blinknoteref-119">119</a> and afforded some
      grounds for a fable which was afterwards invented, that he had been
      purified by confession and penance from the guilt contracted by the murder
      of his innocent predecessor. <a href="#Blinknote-120" id="Blinknoteref-120" name="Blinknoteref-120">120</a> The fall of Philip introduced, with the
      change of masters, a new system of government, so oppressive to the
      Christians, that their former condition, ever since the time of Domitian,
      was represented as a state of perfect freedom and security, if compared
      with the rigorous treatment which they experienced under the short reign
      of Decius. <a href="#Blinknote-121" id="Blinknoteref-121" name="Blinknoteref-121">121</a> The virtues of that prince will scarcely
      allow us to suspect that he was actuated by a mean resentment against the
      favorites of his predecessor; and it is more reasonable to believe, that
      in the prosecution of his general design to restore the purity of Roman
      manners, he was desirous of delivering the empire from what he condemned
      as a recent and criminal superstition. The bishops of the most
      considerable cities were removed by exile or death: the vigilance of the
      magistrates prevented the clergy of Rome during sixteen months from
      proceeding to a new election; and it was the opinion of the Christians,
      that the emperor would more patiently endure a competitor for the purple,
      than a bishop in the capital. <a href="#Blinknote-122" id="Blinknoteref-122" name="Blinknoteref-122">122</a> Were it possible to
      suppose that the penetration of Decius had discovered pride under the
      disguise of humility, or that he could foresee the temporal dominion which
      might insensibly arise from the claims of spiritual authority, we might be
      less surprised, that he should consider the successors of St. Peter, as
      the most formidable rivals to those of Augustus.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-118" name="Blinknote-118">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      118 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-118">return</a>)<br/> [ Orosius, l. vii. c. 19,
      mentions Origen as the object of Maximin's resentment; and Firmilianus, a
      Cappadocian bishop of that age, gives a just and confined idea of this
      persecution, (apud Cyprian Epist. 75.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-119" name="Blinknote-119">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      119 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-119">return</a>)<br/> [ The mention of those
      princes who were publicly supposed to be Christians, as we find it in an
      epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria, (ap. Euseb. l. vii. c. 10,) evidently
      alludes to Philip and his family, and forms a contemporary evidence, that
      such a report had prevailed; but the Egyptian bishop, who lived at an
      humble distance from the court of Rome, expresses himself with a becoming
      diffidence concerning the truth of the fact. The epistles of Origen (which
      were extant in the time of Eusebius, see l. vi. c. 36) would most probably
      decide this curious rather than important question.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-120" name="Blinknote-120">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      120 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-120">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. l. vi. c. 34.
      The story, as is usual, has been embellished by succeeding writers, and is
      confuted, with much superfluous learning, by Frederick Spanheim, (Opera
      Varia, tom. ii. p. 400, &amp;c.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-121" name="Blinknote-121">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      121 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-121">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius, de Mortibus
      Persecutorum, c. 3, 4. After celebrating the felicity and increase of the
      church, under a long succession of good princes, he adds, "Extitit post
      annos plurimos, execrabile animal, Decius, qui vexaret Ecclesiam."]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-122" name="Blinknote-122">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      122 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-122">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. l. vi. c. 39.
      Cyprian. Epistol. 55. The see of Rome remained vacant from the martyrdom
      of Fabianus, the 20th of January, A. D. 259, till the election of
      Cornelius, the 4th of June, A. D. 251 Decius had probably left Rome, since
      he was killed before the end of that year.]
    </p>
<p>
      The administration of Valerian was distinguished by a levity and
      inconstancy ill suited to the gravity of the Roman Censor. In the first
      part of his reign, he surpassed in clemency those princes who had been
      suspected of an attachment to the Christian faith. In the last three years
      and a half, listening to the insinuations of a minister addicted to the
      superstitions of Egypt, he adopted the maxims, and imitated the severity,
      of his predecessor Decius. <a href="#Blinknote-123" id="Blinknoteref-123" name="Blinknoteref-123">123</a> The accession of Gallienus, which increased
      the calamities of the empire, restored peace to the church; and the
      Christians obtained the free exercise of their religion by an edict
      addressed to the bishops, and conceived in such terms as seemed to
      acknowledge their office and public character. <a href="#Blinknote-124" id="Blinknoteref-124" name="Blinknoteref-124">124</a> The ancient laws,
      without being formally repealed, were suffered to sink into oblivion; and
      (excepting only some hostile intentions which are attributed to the
      emperor Aurelian <a href="#Blinknote-125" id="Blinknoteref-125" name="Blinknoteref-125">125</a> the disciples of Christ passed above forty
      years in a state of prosperity, far more dangerous to their virtue than
      the severest trials of persecution.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-123" name="Blinknote-123">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      123 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-123">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. l. vii. c. 10.
      Mosheim (p. 548) has very clearly shown that the praefect Macrianus, and
      the Egyptian Magus, are one and the same person.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-124" name="Blinknote-124">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      124 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-124">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius (l. vii. c.
      13) gives us a Greek version of this Latin edict, which seems to have been
      very concise. By another edict, he directed that the Coemeteria should be
      restored to the Christians.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-125" name="Blinknote-125">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      125 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-125">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. l. vii. c. 30.
      Lactantius de M. P. c. 6. Hieronym. in Chron. p. 177. Orosius, l. vii. c.
      23. Their language is in general so ambiguous and incorrect, that we are
      at a loss to determine how far Aurelian had carried his intentions before
      he was assassinated. Most of the moderns (except Dodwell, Dissertat.
      Cyprian. vi. 64) have seized the occasion of gaining a few extraordinary
      martyrs. * Note: Dr. Lardner has detailed, with his usual impartiality,
      all that has come down to us relating to the persecution of Aurelian, and
      concludes by saying, "Upon more carefully examining the words of Eusebius,
      and observing the accounts of other authors, learned men have generally,
      and, as I think, very judiciously, determined, that Aurelian not only
      intended, but did actually persecute: but his persecution was short, he
      having died soon after the publication of his edicts." Heathen Test. c.
      xxxvi.—Basmage positively pronounces the same opinion: Non
      intentatum modo, sed executum quoque brevissimo tempore mandatum, nobis
      infixum est in aniasis. Basn. Ann. 275, No. 2 and compare Pagi Ann. 272,
      Nos. 4, 12, 27—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      The story of Paul of Samosata, who filled the metropolitan see of Antioch,
      while the East was in the hands of Odenathus and Zenobia, may serve to
      illustrate the condition and character of the times. The wealth of that
      prelate was a sufficient evidence of his guilt, since it was neither
      derived from the inheritance of his fathers, nor acquired by the arts of
      honest industry. But Paul considered the service of the church as a very
      lucrative profession. <a href="#Blinknote-126" id="Blinknoteref-126" name="Blinknoteref-126">126</a> His ecclesiastical jurisdiction was venal and
      rapacious; he extorted frequent contributions from the most opulent of the
      faithful, and converted to his own use a considerable part of the public
      revenue. By his pride and luxury, the Christian religion was rendered
      odious in the eyes of the Gentiles. His council chamber and his throne,
      the splendor with which he appeared in public, the suppliant crowd who
      solicited his attention, the multitude of letters and petitions to which
      he dictated his answers, and the perpetual hurry of business in which he
      was involved, were circumstances much better suited to the state of a
      civil magistrate, <a href="#Blinknote-127" id="Blinknoteref-127" name="Blinknoteref-127">127</a> than to the humility of a primitive bishop.
      When he harangued his people from the pulpit, Paul affected the figurative
      style and the theatrical gestures of an Asiatic sophist, while the
      cathedral resounded with the loudest and most extravagant acclamations in
      the praise of his divine eloquence. Against those who resisted his power,
      or refused to flatter his vanity, the prelate of Antioch was arrogant,
      rigid, and inexorable; but he relaxed the discipline, and lavished the
      treasures of the church on his dependent clergy, who were permitted to
      imitate their master in the gratification of every sensual appetite. For
      Paul indulged himself very freely in the pleasures of the table, and he
      had received into the episcopal palace two young and beautiful women as
      the constant companions of his leisure moments. <a href="#Blinknote-128" id="Blinknoteref-128" name="Blinknoteref-128">128</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-126" name="Blinknote-126">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      126 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-126">return</a>)<br/> [ Paul was better pleased
      with the title of Ducenarius, than with that of bishop. The Ducenarius was
      an Imperial procurator, so called from his salary of two hundred
      Sestertia, or 1600l. a year. (See Salmatius ad Hist. August. p. 124.) Some
      critics suppose that the bishop of Antioch had actually obtained such an
      office from Zenobia, while others consider it only as a figurative
      expression of his pomp and insolence.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-127" name="Blinknote-127">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      127 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-127">return</a>)<br/> [ Simony was not unknown
      in those times; and the clergy some times bought what they intended to
      sell. It appears that the bishopric of Carthage was purchased by a wealthy
      matron, named Lucilla, for her servant Majorinus. The price was 400
      Folles. (Monument. Antiq. ad calcem Optati, p. 263.) Every Follis
      contained 125 pieces of silver, and the whole sum may be computed at about
      2400l.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-128" name="Blinknote-128">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      128 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-128">return</a>)<br/> [ If we are desirous of
      extenuating the vices of Paul, we must suspect the assembled bishops of
      the East of publishing the most malicious calumnies in circular epistles
      addressed to all the churches of the empire, (ap. Euseb. l. vii. c. 30.)]
    </p>
<p>
      Notwithstanding these scandalous vices, if Paul of Samosata had preserved
      the purity of the orthodox faith, his reign over the capital of Syria
      would have ended only with his life; and had a seasonable persecution
      intervened, an effort of courage might perhaps have placed him in the rank
      of saints and martyrs. <a href="#Blinknote-1281" id="Blinknoteref-1281" name="Blinknoteref-1281">1281</a>
</p>
<p>
      Some nice and subtle errors, which he imprudently adopted and obstinately
      maintained, concerning the doctrine of the Trinity, excited the zeal and
      indignation of the Eastern churches. <a href="#Blinknote-129" id="Blinknoteref-129" name="Blinknoteref-129">129</a>
</p>
<p>
      From Egypt to the Euxine Sea, the bishops were in arms and in motion.
      Several councils were held, confutations were published, excommunications
      were pronounced, ambiguous explanations were by turns accepted and
      refused, treaties were concluded and violated, and at length Paul of
      Samosata was degraded from his episcopal character, by the sentence of
      seventy or eighty bishops, who assembled for that purpose at Antioch, and
      who, without consulting the rights of the clergy or people, appointed a
      successor by their own authority. The manifest irregularity of this
      proceeding increased the numbers of the discontented faction; and as Paul,
      who was no stranger to the arts of courts, had insinuated himself into the
      favor of Zenobia, he maintained above four years the possession of the
      episcopal house and office. <a href="#Blinknote-1291" id="Blinknoteref-1291" name="Blinknoteref-1291">1291</a> The victory of
      Aurelian changed the face of the East, and the two contending parties, who
      applied to each other the epithets of schism and heresy, were either
      commanded or permitted to plead their cause before the tribunal of the
      conqueror. This public and very singular trial affords a convincing proof
      that the existence, the property, the privileges, and the internal policy
      of the Christians, were acknowledged, if not by the laws, at least by the
      magistrates, of the empire. As a Pagan and as a soldier, it could scarcely
      be expected that Aurelian should enter into the discussion, whether the
      sentiments of Paul or those of his adversaries were most agreeable to the
      true standard of the orthodox faith. His determination, however, was
      founded on the general principles of equity and reason. He considered the
      bishops of Italy as the most impartial and respectable judges among the
      Christians, and as soon as he was informed that they had unanimously
      approved the sentence of the council, he acquiesced in their opinion, and
      immediately gave orders that Paul should be compelled to relinquish the
      temporal possessions belonging to an office, of which, in the judgment of
      his brethren, he had been regularly deprived. But while we applaud the
      justice, we should not overlook the policy, of Aurelian, who was desirous
      of restoring and cementing the dependence of the provinces on the capital,
      by every means which could bind the interest or prejudices of any part of
      his subjects. <a href="#Blinknote-130" id="Blinknoteref-130" name="Blinknoteref-130">130</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1281" name="Blinknote-1281">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1281 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1281">return</a>)<br/> [ It appears,
      nevertheless, that the vices and immoralities of Paul of Samosata had much
      weight in the sentence pronounced against him by the bishops. The object
      of the letter, addressed by the synod to the bishops of Rome and
      Alexandria, was to inform them of the change in the faith of Paul, the
      altercations and discussions to which it had given rise, as well as of his
      morals and the whole of his conduct. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. vii c. xxx—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-129" name="Blinknote-129">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      129 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-129">return</a>)<br/> [ His heresy (like those
      of Noetus and Sabellius, in the same century) tended to confound the
      mysterious distinction of the divine persons. See Mosheim, p. 702, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1291" name="Blinknote-1291">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1291 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1291">return</a>)<br/> [ "Her favorite,
      (Zenobia's,) Paul of Samosata, seems to have entertained some views of
      attempting a union between Judaism and Christianity; both parties rejected
      the unnatural alliance." Hist. of Jews, iii. 175, and Jost. Geschichte der
      Israeliter, iv. 167. The protection of the severe Zenobia is the only
      circumstance which may raise a doubt of the notorious immorality of Paul.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-130" name="Blinknote-130">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      130 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-130">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. vii. c. 30. We are entirely indebted to him for the curious
      story of Paul of Samosata.]
    </p>
<p>
      Amidst the frequent revolutions of the empire, the Christians still
      flourished in peace and prosperity; and notwithstanding a celebrated aera
      of martyrs has been deduced from the accession of Diocletian, <a href="#Blinknote-131" id="Blinknoteref-131" name="Blinknoteref-131">131</a>
      the new system of policy, introduced and maintained by the wisdom of that
      prince, continued, during more than eighteen years, to breathe the mildest
      and most liberal spirit of religious toleration. The mind of Diocletian
      himself was less adapted indeed to speculative inquiries, than to the
      active labors of war and government. His prudence rendered him averse to
      any great innovation, and though his temper was not very susceptible of
      zeal or enthusiasm, he always maintained an habitual regard for the
      ancient deities of the empire. But the leisure of the two empresses, of
      his wife Prisca, and of Valeria, his daughter, permitted them to listen
      with more attention and respect to the truths of Christianity, which in
      every age has acknowledged its important obligations to female devotion.
      <a href="#Blinknote-132" id="Blinknoteref-132" name="Blinknoteref-132">132</a>
      The principal eunuchs, Lucian <a href="#Blinknote-133" id="Blinknoteref-133" name="Blinknoteref-133">133</a> and Dorotheus,
      Gorgonius and Andrew, who attended the person, possessed the favor, and
      governed the household of Diocletian, protected by their powerful
      influence the faith which they had embraced. Their example was imitated by
      many of the most considerable officers of the palace, who, in their
      respective stations, had the care of the Imperial ornaments, of the robes,
      of the furniture, of the jewels, and even of the private treasury; and,
      though it might sometimes be incumbent on them to accompany the emperor
      when he sacrificed in the temple, <a href="#Blinknote-134" id="Blinknoteref-134" name="Blinknoteref-134">134</a> they enjoyed, with
      their wives, their children, and their slaves, the free exercise of the
      Christian religion. Diocletian and his colleagues frequently conferred the
      most important offices on those persons who avowed their abhorrence for
      the worship of the gods, but who had displayed abilities proper for the
      service of the state. The bishops held an honorable rank in their
      respective provinces, and were treated with distinction and respect, not
      only by the people, but by the magistrates themselves. Almost in every
      city, the ancient churches were found insufficient to contain the
      increasing multitude of proselytes; and in their place more stately and
      capacious edifices were erected for the public worship of the faithful.
      The corruption of manners and principles, so forcibly lamented by
      Eusebius, <a href="#Blinknote-135" id="Blinknoteref-135" name="Blinknoteref-135">135</a> may be considered, not only as a consequence,
      but as a proof, of the liberty which the Christians enjoyed and abused
      under the reign of Diocletian. Prosperity had relaxed the nerves of
      discipline. Fraud, envy, and malice prevailed in every congregation. The
      presbyters aspired to the episcopal office, which every day became an
      object more worthy of their ambition. The bishops, who contended with each
      other for ecclesiastical preeminence, appeared by their conduct to claim a
      secular and tyrannical power in the church; and the lively faith which
      still distinguished the Christians from the Gentiles, was shown much less
      in their lives, than in their controversial writings.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-131" name="Blinknote-131">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      131 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-131">return</a>)<br/> [ The Aera of Martyrs,
      which is still in use among the Copts and the Abyssinians, must be
      reckoned from the 29th of August, A. D. 284; as the beginning of the
      Egyptian year was nineteen days earlier than the real accession of
      Diocletian. See Dissertation Preliminaire a l'Art de verifier les Dates. *
      Note: On the aera of martyrs see the very curious dissertations of Mons
      Letronne on some recently discovered inscriptions in Egypt and Nubis, p.
      102, &amp;c.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-132" name="Blinknote-132">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      132 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-132">return</a>)<br/> [ The expression of
      Lactantius, (de M. P. c. 15,) "sacrificio pollui coegit," implies their
      antecedent conversion to the faith, but does not seem to justify the
      assertion of Mosheim, (p. 912,) that they had been privately baptized.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-133" name="Blinknote-133">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      133 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-133">return</a>)<br/> [ M. de Tillemont
      (Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. v. part i. p. 11, 12) has quoted from the
      Spicilegium of Dom Luc d'Archeri a very curious instruction which Bishop
      Theonas composed for the use of Lucian.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-134" name="Blinknote-134">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      134 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-134">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius, de M. P. c.
      10.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-135" name="Blinknote-135">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      135 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-135">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. viii. c. 1. The reader who consults the original will not
      accuse me of heightening the picture. Eusebius was about sixteen years of
      age at the accession of the emperor Diocletian.]
    </p>
<p>
      Notwithstanding this seeming security, an attentive observer might discern
      some symptoms that threatened the church with a more violent persecution
      than any which she had yet endured. The zeal and rapid progress of the
      Christians awakened the Polytheists from their supine indifference in the
      cause of those deities, whom custom and education had taught them to
      revere. The mutual provocations of a religious war, which had already
      continued above two hundred years, exasperated the animosity of the
      contending parties. The Pagans were incensed at the rashness of a recent
      and obscure sect, which presumed to accuse their countrymen of error, and
      to devote their ancestors to eternal misery. The habits of justifying the
      popular mythology against the invectives of an implacable enemy, produced
      in their minds some sentiments of faith and reverence for a system which
      they had been accustomed to consider with the most careless levity. The
      supernatural powers assumed by the church inspired at the same time terror
      and emulation. The followers of the established religion intrenched
      themselves behind a similar fortification of prodigies; invented new modes
      of sacrifice, of expiation, and of initiation; <a href="#Blinknote-136" id="Blinknoteref-136" name="Blinknoteref-136">136</a> attempted to revive
      the credit of their expiring oracles; <a href="#Blinknote-137" id="Blinknoteref-137" name="Blinknoteref-137">137</a> and listened with
      eager credulity to every impostor, who flattered their prejudices by a
      tale of wonders. <a href="#Blinknote-138" id="Blinknoteref-138" name="Blinknoteref-138">138</a> Both parties seemed to acknowledge the truth
      of those miracles which were claimed by their adversaries; and while they
      were contented with ascribing them to the arts of magic, and to the power
      of daemons, they mutually concurred in restoring and establishing the
      reign of superstition. <a href="#Blinknote-139" id="Blinknoteref-139" name="Blinknoteref-139">139</a> Philosophy, her most dangerous enemy, was now
      converted into her most useful ally. The groves of the academy, the
      gardens of Epicurus, and even the portico of the Stoics, were almost
      deserted, as so many different schools of scepticism or impiety; <a href="#Blinknote-140" id="Blinknoteref-140" name="Blinknoteref-140">140</a>
      and many among the Romans were desirous that the writings of Cicero should
      be condemned and suppressed by the authority of the senate. <a href="#Blinknote-141" id="Blinknoteref-141" name="Blinknoteref-141">141</a>
      The prevailing sect of the new Platonicians judged it prudent to connect
      themselves with the priests, whom perhaps they despised, against the
      Christians, whom they had reason to fear. These fashionable Philosophers
      prosecuted the design of extracting allegorical wisdom from the fictions
      of the Greek poets; instituted mysterious rites of devotion for the use of
      their chosen disciples; recommended the worship of the ancient gods as the
      emblems or ministers of the Supreme Deity, and composed against the faith
      of the gospel many elaborate treatises, <a href="#Blinknote-142" id="Blinknoteref-142" name="Blinknoteref-142">142</a> which have since been
      committed to the flames by the prudence of orthodox emperors. <a href="#Blinknote-143" id="Blinknoteref-143" name="Blinknoteref-143">143</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-136" name="Blinknote-136">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      136 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-136">return</a>)<br/> [ We might quote, among a
      great number of instances, the mysterious worship of Mythras, and the
      Taurobolia; the latter of which became fashionable in the time of the
      Antonines, (see a Dissertation of M. de Boze, in the Memoires de
      l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. ii. p. 443.) The romance of Apuleius is
      as full of devotion as of satire. * Note: On the extraordinary progress of
      the Mahriac rites, in the West, see De Guigniaud's translation of Creuzer,
      vol. i. p. 365, and Note 9, tom. i. part 2, p. 738, &amp;c.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-137" name="Blinknote-137">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      137 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-137">return</a>)<br/> [ The impostor Alexander
      very strongly recommended the oracle of Trophonius at Mallos, and those of
      Apollo at Claros and Miletus, (Lucian, tom. ii. p. 236, edit. Reitz.) The
      last of these, whose singular history would furnish a very curious
      episode, was consulted by Diocletian before he published his edicts of
      persecution, (Lactantius, de M. P. c. 11.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-138" name="Blinknote-138">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      138 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-138">return</a>)<br/> [ Besides the ancient
      stories of Pythagoras and Aristeas, the cures performed at the shrine of
      Aesculapius, and the fables related of Apollonius of Tyana, were
      frequently opposed to the miracles of Christ; though I agree with Dr.
      Lardner, (see Testimonies, vol. iii. p. 253, 352,) that when Philostratus
      composed the life of Apollonius, he had no such intention.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-139" name="Blinknote-139">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      139 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-139">return</a>)<br/> [ It is seriously to be
      lamented, that the Christian fathers, by acknowledging the supernatural,
      or, as they deem it, the infernal part of Paganism, destroy with their own
      hands the great advantage which we might otherwise derive from the liberal
      concessions of our adversaries.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-140" name="Blinknote-140">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      140 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-140">return</a>)<br/> [ Julian (p. 301, edit.
      Spanheim) expresses a pious joy, that the providence of the gods had
      extinguished the impious sects, and for the most part destroyed the books
      of the Pyrrhonians and Epicuraeans, which had been very numerous, since
      Epicurus himself composed no less than 300 volumes. See Diogenes Laertius,
      l. x. c. 26.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-141" name="Blinknote-141">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      141 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-141">return</a>)<br/> [ Cumque alios audiam
      mussitare indignanter, et dicere opportere statui per Senatum, aboleantur
      ut haec scripta, quibus Christiana Religio comprobetur, et vetustatis
      opprimatur auctoritas. Arnobius adversus Gentes, l. iii. p. 103, 104. He
      adds very properly, Erroris convincite Ciceronem... nam intercipere
      scripta, et publicatam velle submergere lectionem, non est Deum defendere
      sed veritatis testificationem timere.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-142" name="Blinknote-142">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      142 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-142">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius (Divin.
      Institut. l. v. c. 2, 3) gives a very clear and spirited account of two of
      these philosophic adversaries of the faith. The large treatise of Porphyry
      against the Christians consisted of thirty books, and was composed in
      Sicily about the year 270.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-143" name="Blinknote-143">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      143 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-143">return</a>)<br/> [ See Socrates, Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. i. c. 9, and Codex Justinian. l. i. i. l. s.]
    </p>
<p>
      Although the policy of Diocletian and the humanity of Constantius inclined
      them to preserve inviolate the maxims of toleration, it was soon
      discovered that their two associates, Maximian and Galerius, entertained
      the most implacable aversion for the name and religion of the Christians.
      The minds of those princes had never been enlightened by science;
      education had never softened their temper. They owed their greatness to
      their swords, and in their most elevated fortune they still retained their
      superstitious prejudices of soldiers and peasants. In the general
      administration of the provinces they obeyed the laws which their
      benefactor had established; but they frequently found occasions of
      exercising within their camp and palaces a secret persecution, <a href="#Blinknote-144" id="Blinknoteref-144" name="Blinknoteref-144">144</a>
      for which the imprudent zeal of the Christians sometimes offered the most
      specious pretences. A sentence of death was executed upon Maximilianus, an
      African youth, who had been produced by his own father <a href="#Blinknote-1441" id="Blinknoteref-1441" name="Blinknoteref-1441">1441</a>
      before the magistrate as a sufficient and legal recruit, but who
      obstinately persisted in declaring, that his conscience would not permit
      him to embrace the profession of a soldier. <a href="#Blinknote-145" id="Blinknoteref-145" name="Blinknoteref-145">145</a> It could scarcely be
      expected that any government should suffer the action of Marcellus the
      Centurion to pass with impunity. On the day of a public festival, that
      officer threw away his belt, his arms, and the ensigns of his office, and
      exclaimed with a loud voice, that he would obey none but Jesus Christ the
      eternal King, and that he renounced forever the use of carnal weapons, and
      the service of an idolatrous master. The soldiers, as soon as they
      recovered from their astonishment, secured the person of Marcellus. He was
      examined in the city of Tingi by the president of that part of Mauritania;
      and as he was convicted by his own confession, he was condemned and
      beheaded for the crime of desertion. <a href="#Blinknote-146" id="Blinknoteref-146" name="Blinknoteref-146">146</a> Examples of such a
      nature savor much less of religious persecution than of martial or even
      civil law; but they served to alienate the mind of the emperors, to
      justify the severity of Galerius, who dismissed a great number of
      Christian officers from their employments; and to authorize the opinion,
      that a sect of enthusiastics, which avowed principles so repugnant to the
      public safety, must either remain useless, or would soon become dangerous,
      subjects of the empire.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-144" name="Blinknote-144">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      144 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-144">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, l. viii. c.
      4, c. 17. He limits the number of military martyrs, by a remarkable
      expression, of which neither his Latin nor French translator have rendered
      the energy. Notwithstanding the authority of Eusebius, and the silence of
      Lactantius, Ambrose, Sulpicius, Orosius, &amp;c., it has been long
      believed, that the Thebaean legion, consisting of 6000 Christians,
      suffered martyrdom by the order of Maximian, in the valley of the Pennine
      Alps. The story was first published about the middle of the 5th century,
      by Eucherius, bishop of Lyons, who received it from certain persons, who
      received it from Isaac, bishop of Geneva, who is said to have received it
      from Theodore, bishop of Octodurum. The abbey of St. Maurice still
      subsists, a rich monument of the credulity of Sigismund, king of Burgundy.
      See an excellent Dissertation in xxxvith volume of the Bibliotheque
      Raisonnee, p. 427-454.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1441" name="Blinknote-1441">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1441 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1441">return</a>)<br/> [ M. Guizot criticizes
      Gibbon's account of this incident. He supposes that Maximilian was not
      "produced by his father as a recruit," but was obliged to appear by the
      law, which compelled the sons of soldiers to serve at 21 years old. Was
      not this a law of Constantine? Neither does this circumstance appear in
      the acts. His father had clearly expected him to serve, as he had bought
      him a new dress for the occasion; yet he refused to force the conscience
      of his son. and when Maximilian was condemned to death, the father
      returned home in joy, blessing God for having bestowed upon him such a
      son.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-145" name="Blinknote-145">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      145 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-145">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Acta Sincera,
      p. 299. The accounts of his martyrdom and that of Marcellus, bear every
      mark of truth and authenticity.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-146" name="Blinknote-146">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      146 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-146">return</a>)<br/> [ Acta Sincera, p. 302. *
      Note: M. Guizot here justly observes, that it was the necessity of
      sacrificing to the gods, which induced Marcellus to act in this manner.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      After the success of the Persian war had raised the hopes and the
      reputation of Galerius, he passed a winter with Diocletian in the palace
      of Nicomedia; and the fate of Christianity became the object of their
      secret consultations. <a href="#Blinknote-147" id="Blinknoteref-147" name="Blinknoteref-147">147</a> The experienced emperor was still inclined to
      pursue measures of lenity; and though he readily consented to exclude the
      Christians from holding any employments in the household or the army, he
      urged in the strongest terms the danger as well as cruelty of shedding the
      blood of those deluded fanatics. Galerius at length extorted <a href="#Blinknote-1471" id="Blinknoteref-1471" name="Blinknoteref-1471">1471</a>
      from him the permission of summoning a council, composed of a few persons
      the most distinguished in the civil and military departments of the state.
    </p>
<p>
      The important question was agitated in their presence, and those ambitious
      courtiers easily discerned, that it was incumbent on them to second, by
      their eloquence, the importunate violence of the Caesar. It may be
      presumed, that they insisted on every topic which might interest the
      pride, the piety, or the fears, of their sovereign in the destruction of
      Christianity. Perhaps they represented, that the glorious work of the
      deliverance of the empire was left imperfect, as long as an independent
      people was permitted to subsist and multiply in the heart of the
      provinces. The Christians, (it might specially be alleged,) renouncing the
      gods and the institutions of Rome, had constituted a distinct republic,
      which might yet be suppressed before it had acquired any military force;
      but which was already governed by its own laws and magistrates, was
      possessed of a public treasure, and was intimately connected in all its
      parts by the frequent assemblies of the bishops, to whose decrees their
      numerous and opulent congregations yielded an implicit obedience.
      Arguments like these may seem to have determined the reluctant mind of
      Diocletian to embrace a new system of persecution; but though we may
      suspect, it is not in our power to relate, the secret intrigues of the
      palace, the private views and resentments, the jealousy of women or
      eunuchs, and all those trifling but decisive causes which so often
      influence the fate of empires, and the councils of the wisest monarchs. <a href="#Blinknote-148" id="Blinknoteref-148" name="Blinknoteref-148">148</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-147" name="Blinknote-147">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      147 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-147">return</a>)<br/> [ De M. P. c. 11.
      Lactantius (or whoever was the author of this little treatise) was, at
      that time, an inhabitant of Nicomedia; but it seems difficult to conceive
      how he could acquire so accurate a knowledge of what passed in the
      Imperial cabinet. Note: * Lactantius, who was subsequently chosen by
      Constantine to educate Crispus, might easily have learned these details
      from Constantine himself, already of sufficient age to interest himself in
      the affairs of the government, and in a position to obtain the best
      information.—G. This assumes the doubtful point of the authorship of
      the Treatise.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1471" name="Blinknote-1471">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1471 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1471">return</a>)<br/> [ This permission was
      not extorted from Diocletian; he took the step of his own accord.
      Lactantius says, in truth, Nec tamen deflectere potuit (Diocletianus)
      praecipitis hominis insaniam; placuit ergo amicorum sententiam experiri.
      (De Mort. Pers. c. 11.) But this measure was in accordance with the
      artificial character of Diocletian, who wished to have the appearance of
      doing good by his own impulse and evil by the impulse of others. Nam erat
      hujus malitiae, cum bonum quid facere decrevisse sine consilio faciebat,
      ut ipse laudaretur. Cum autem malum. quoniam id reprehendendum sciebat, in
      consilium multos advocabat, ut alioram culpao adscriberetur quicquid ipse
      deliquerat. Lact. ib. Eutropius says likewise, Miratus callide fuit, sagax
      praeterea et admodum subtilis ingenio, et qui severitatem suam aliena
      invidia vellet explere. Eutrop. ix. c. 26.—G.——The
      manner in which the coarse and unfriendly pencil of the author of the
      Treatise de Mort. Pers. has drawn the character of Diocletian, seems
      inconsistent with this profound subtilty. Many readers will perhaps agree
      with Gibbon.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-148" name="Blinknote-148">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      148 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-148">return</a>)<br/> [ The only circumstance
      which we can discover, is the devotion and jealousy of the mother of
      Galerius. She is described by Lactantius, as Deorum montium cultrix;
      mulier admodum superstitiosa. She had a great influence over her son, and
      was offended by the disregard of some of her Christian servants. * Note:
      This disregard consisted in the Christians fasting and praying instead of
      participating in the banquets and sacrifices which she celebrated with the
      Pagans. Dapibus sacrificabat poene quotidie ac vicariis suis epulis
      exhibebat. Christiani abstinebant, et illa cum gentibus epulante, jejuniis
      hi et oratiomibus insisteban; hine concepit odium Lact de Hist. Pers. c.
      11.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      The pleasure of the emperors was at length signified to the Christians,
      who, during the course of this melancholy winter, had expected, with
      anxiety, the result of so many secret consultations. The twenty-third of
      February, which coincided with the Roman festival of the Terminalia, <a href="#Blinknote-149" id="Blinknoteref-149" name="Blinknoteref-149">149</a>
      was appointed (whether from accident or design) to set bounds to the
      progress of Christianity. At the earliest dawn of day, the Praetorian
      praefect, <a href="#Blinknote-150" id="Blinknoteref-150" name="Blinknoteref-150">150</a> accompanied by several generals, tribunes,
      and officers of the revenue, repaired to the principal church of
      Nicomedia, which was situated on an eminence in the most populous and
      beautiful part of the city. The doors were instantly broke open; they
      rushed into the sanctuary; and as they searched in vain for some visible
      object of worship, they were obliged to content themselves with committing
      to the flames the volumes of the holy Scripture. The ministers of
      Diocletian were followed by a numerous body of guards and pioneers, who
      marched in order of battle, and were provided with all the instruments
      used in the destruction of fortified cities. By their incessant labor, a
      sacred edifice, which towered above the Imperial palace, and had long
      excited the indignation and envy of the Gentiles, was in a few hours
      levelled with the ground. <a href="#Blinknote-151" id="Blinknoteref-151" name="Blinknoteref-151">151</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-149" name="Blinknote-149">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      149 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-149">return</a>)<br/> [ The worship and
      festival of the god Terminus are elegantly illustrated by M. de Boze, Mem.
      de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. i. p. 50.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-150" name="Blinknote-150">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      150 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-150">return</a>)<br/> [ In our only MS. of
      Lactantius, we read profectus; but reason, and the authority of all the
      critics, allow us, instead of that word, which destroys the sense of the
      passage, to substitute proefectus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-151" name="Blinknote-151">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      151 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-151">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius, de M. P. c.
      12, gives a very lively picture of the destruction of the church.]
    </p>
<p>
      The next day the general edict of persecution was published; <a href="#Blinknote-152" id="Blinknoteref-152" name="Blinknoteref-152">152</a>
      and though Diocletian, still averse to the effusion of blood, had
      moderated the fury of Galerius, who proposed, that every one refusing to
      offer sacrifice should immediately be burnt alive, the penalties inflicted
      on the obstinacy of the Christians might be deemed sufficiently rigorous
      and effectual. It was enacted, that their churches, in all the provinces
      of the empire, should be demolished to their foundations; and the
      punishment of death was denounced against all who should presume to hold
      any secret assemblies for the purpose of religious worship. The
      philosophers, who now assumed the unworthy office of directing the blind
      zeal of persecution, had diligently studied the nature and genius of the
      Christian religion; and as they were not ignorant that the speculative
      doctrines of the faith were supposed to be contained in the writings of
      the prophets, of the evangelists, and of the apostles, they most probably
      suggested the order, that the bishops and presbyters should deliver all
      their sacred books into the hands of the magistrates; who were commanded,
      under the severest penalties, to burn them in a public and solemn manner.
      By the same edict, the property of the church was at once confiscated; and
      the several parts of which it might consist were either sold to the
      highest bidder, united to the Imperial domain, bestowed on the cities and
      corporations, or granted to the solicitations of rapacious courtiers.
      After taking such effectual measures to abolish the worship, and to
      dissolve the government of the Christians, it was thought necessary to
      subject to the most intolerable hardships the condition of those perverse
      individuals who should still reject the religion of nature, of Rome, and
      of their ancestors. Persons of a liberal birth were declared incapable of
      holding any honors or employments; slaves were forever deprived of the
      hopes of freedom, and the whole body of the people were put out of the
      protection of the law. The judges were authorized to hear and to determine
      every action that was brought against a Christian. But the Christians were
      not permitted to complain of any injury which they themselves had
      suffered; and thus those unfortunate sectaries were exposed to the
      severity, while they were excluded from the benefits, of public justice.
      This new species of martyrdom, so painful and lingering, so obscure and
      ignominious, was, perhaps, the most proper to weary the constancy of the
      faithful: nor can it be doubted that the passions and interest of mankind
      were disposed on this occasion to second the designs of the emperors. But
      the policy of a well-ordered government must sometimes have interposed in
      behalf of the oppressed Christians; <a href="#Blinknote-1521" id="Blinknoteref-1521" name="Blinknoteref-1521">1521</a> nor was it possible
      for the Roman princes entirely to remove the apprehension of punishment,
      or to connive at every act of fraud and violence, without exposing their
      own authority and the rest of their subjects to the most alarming dangers.
      <a href="#Blinknote-153" id="Blinknoteref-153" name="Blinknoteref-153">153</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-152" name="Blinknote-152">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      152 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-152">return</a>)<br/> [ Mosheim, (p. 922—926,)
      from man scattered passages of Lactantius and Eusebius, has collected a
      very just and accurate notion of this edict though he sometimes deviates
      into conjecture and refinement.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1521" name="Blinknote-1521">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1521 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1521">return</a>)<br/> [ This wants proof. The
      edict of Diocletian was executed in all its right during the rest of his
      reign. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l viii. c. 13.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-153" name="Blinknote-153">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      153 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-153">return</a>)<br/> [ Many ages afterwards,
      Edward J. practised, with great success, the same mode of persecution
      against the clergy of England. See Hume's History of England, vol. ii. p.
      300, last 4to edition.]
    </p>
<p>
      This edict was scarcely exhibited to the public view, in the most
      conspicuous place of Nicomedia, before it was torn down by the hands of a
      Christian, who expressed at the same time, by the bitterest invectives,
      his contempt as well as abhorrence for such impious and tyrannical
      governors. His offence, according to the mildest laws, amounted to
      treason, and deserved death. And if it be true that he was a person of
      rank and education, those circumstances could serve only to aggravate his
      guilt. He was burnt, or rather roasted, by a slow fire; and his
      executioners, zealous to revenge the personal insult which had been
      offered to the emperors, exhausted every refinement of cruelty, without
      being able to subdue his patience, or to alter the steady and insulting
      smile which in his dying agonies he still preserved in his countenance.
      The Christians, though they confessed that his conduct had not been
      strictly conformable to the laws of prudence, admired the divine fervor of
      his zeal; and the excessive commendations which they lavished on the
      memory of their hero and martyr, contributed to fix a deep impression of
      terror and hatred in the mind of Diocletian. <a href="#Blinknote-154" id="Blinknoteref-154" name="Blinknoteref-154">154</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-154" name="Blinknote-154">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      154 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-154">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius only calls
      him quidam, et si non recte, magno tamer animo, &amp;c., c. 12. Eusebius
      (l. viii. c. 5) adorns him with secular honora Neither have condescended
      to mention his name; but the Greeks celebrate his memory under that of
      John. See Tillemont, Memones Ecclesiastiques, tom. v. part ii. p. 320.]
    </p>
<p>
      His fears were soon alarmed by the view of a danger from which he very
      narrowly escaped. Within fifteen days the palace of Nicomedia, and even
      the bed-chamber of Diocletian, were twice in flames; and though both times
      they were extinguished without any material damage, the singular
      repetition of the fire was justly considered as an evident proof that it
      had not been the effect of chance or negligence. The suspicion naturally
      fell on the Christians; and it was suggested, with some degree of
      probability, that those desperate fanatics, provoked by their present
      sufferings, and apprehensive of impending calamities, had entered into a
      conspiracy with their faithful brethren, the eunuchs of the palace,
      against the lives of two emperors, whom they detested as the
      irreconcilable enemies of the church of God.
    </p>
<p>
      Jealousy and resentment prevailed in every breast, but especially in that
      of Diocletian. A great number of persons, distinguished either by the
      offices which they had filled, or by the favor which they had enjoyed,
      were thrown into prison. Every mode of torture was put in practice, and
      the court, as well as city, was polluted with many bloody executions. <a href="#Blinknote-155" id="Blinknoteref-155" name="Blinknoteref-155">155</a>
      But as it was found impossible to extort any discovery of this mysterious
      transaction, it seems incumbent on us either to presume the innocence, or
      to admire the resolution, of the sufferers. A few days afterwards Galerius
      hastily withdrew himself from Nicomedia, declaring, that if he delayed his
      departure from that devoted palace, he should fall a sacrifice to the rage
      of the Christians.
    </p>
<p>
      The ecclesiastical historians, from whom alone we derive a partial and
      imperfect knowledge of this persecution, are at a loss how to account for
      the fears and dangers of the emperors. Two of these writers, a prince and
      a rhetorician, were eye-witnesses of the fire of Nicomedia. The one
      ascribes it to lightning, and the divine wrath; the other affirms, that it
      was kindled by the malice of Galerius himself. <a href="#Blinknote-156" id="Blinknoteref-156" name="Blinknoteref-156">156</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-155" name="Blinknote-155">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      155 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-155">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius de M. P. c.
      13, 14. Potentissimi quondam Eunuchi necati, per quos Palatium et ipse
      constabat. Eusebius (l. viii. c. 6) mentions the cruel executions of the
      eunuchs, Gorgonius and Dorotheus, and of Anthimius, bishop of Nicomedia;
      and both those writers describe, in a vague but tragical manner, the
      horrid scenes which were acted even in the Imperial presence.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-156" name="Blinknote-156">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      156 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-156">return</a>)<br/> [ See Lactantius,
      Eusebius, and Constantine, ad Coetum Sanctorum, c. xxv. Eusebius confesses
      his ignorance of the cause of this fire. Note: As the history of these
      times affords us no example of any attempts made by the Christians against
      their persecutors, we have no reason, not the slightest probability, to
      attribute to them the fire in the palace; and the authority of Constantine
      and Lactantius remains to explain it. M. de Tillemont has shown how they
      can be reconciled. Hist. des Empereurs, Vie de Diocletian, xix.—G.
      Had it been done by a Christian, it would probably have been a fanatic,
      who would have avowed and gloried in it. Tillemont's supposition that the
      fire was first caused by lightning, and fed and increased by the malice of
      Galerius, seems singularly improbable.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      As the edict against the Christians was designed for a general law of the
      whole empire, and as Diocletian and Galerius, though they might not wait
      for the consent, were assured of the concurrence, of the Western princes,
      it would appear more consonant to our ideas of policy, that the governors
      of all the provinces should have received secret instructions to publish,
      on one and the same day, this declaration of war within their respective
      departments. It was at least to be expected, that the convenience of the
      public highways and established posts would have enabled the emperors to
      transmit their orders with the utmost despatch from the palace of
      Nicomedia to the extremities of the Roman world; and that they would not
      have suffered fifty days to elapse, before the edict was published in
      Syria, and near four months before it was signified to the cities of
      Africa. <a href="#Blinknote-157" id="Blinknoteref-157" name="Blinknoteref-157">157</a>
</p>
<p>
      This delay may perhaps be imputed to the cautious temper of Diocletian,
      who had yielded a reluctant consent to the measures of persecution, and
      who was desirous of trying the experiment under his more immediate eye,
      before he gave way to the disorders and discontent which it must
      inevitably occasion in the distant provinces. At first, indeed, the
      magistrates were restrained from the effusion of blood; but the use of
      every other severity was permitted, and even recommended to their zeal;
      nor could the Christians, though they cheerfully resigned the ornaments of
      their churches, resolve to interrupt their religious assemblies, or to
      deliver their sacred books to the flames. The pious obstinacy of Felix, an
      African bishop, appears to have embarrassed the subordinate ministers of
      the government. The curator of his city sent him in chains to the
      proconsul. The proconsul transmitted him to the Praetorian praefect of
      Italy; and Felix, who disdained even to give an evasive answer, was at
      length beheaded at Venusia, in Lucania, a place on which the birth of
      Horace has conferred fame. <a href="#Blinknote-158" id="Blinknoteref-158" name="Blinknoteref-158">158</a> This precedent, and perhaps some Imperial
      rescript, which was issued in consequence of it, appeared to authorize the
      governors of provinces, in punishing with death the refusal of the
      Christians to deliver up their sacred books. There were undoubtedly many
      persons who embraced this opportunity of obtaining the crown of martyrdom;
      but there were likewise too many who purchased an ignominious life, by
      discovering and betraying the holy Scripture into the hands of infidels. A
      great number even of bishops and presbyters acquired, by this criminal
      compliance, the opprobrious epithet of Traditors; and their offence was
      productive of much present scandal and of much future discord in the
      African church. <a href="#Blinknote-159" id="Blinknoteref-159" name="Blinknoteref-159">159</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-157" name="Blinknote-157">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      157 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-157">return</a>)<br/> [ Tillemont, Memoires
      Ecclesiast. tom. v. part i. p. 43.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-158" name="Blinknote-158">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      158 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-158">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Acta Sincera of
      Ruinart, p. 353; those of Felix of Thibara, or Tibiur, appear much less
      corrupted than in the other editions, which afford a lively specimen of
      legendary license.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-159" name="Blinknote-159">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      159 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-159">return</a>)<br/> [ See the first book of
      Optatus of Milevis against the Donatiste, Paris, 1700, edit. Dupin. He
      lived under the reign of Valens.]
    </p>
<p>
      The copies as well as the versions of Scripture, were already so
      multiplied in the empire, that the most severe inquisition could no longer
      be attended with any fatal consequences; and even the sacrifice of those
      volumes, which, in every congregation, were preserved for public use,
      required the consent of some treacherous and unworthy Christians. But the
      ruin of the churches was easily effected by the authority of the
      government, and by the labor of the Pagans. In some provinces, however,
      the magistrates contented themselves with shutting up the places of
      religious worship. In others, they more literally complied with the terms
      of the edict; and after taking away the doors, the benches, and the
      pulpit, which they burnt as it were in a funeral pile, they completely
      demolished the remainder of the edifice. <a href="#Blinknote-160" id="Blinknoteref-160" name="Blinknoteref-160">160</a> It is perhaps to this
      melancholy occasion that we should apply a very remarkable story, which is
      related with so many circumstances of variety and improbability, that it
      serves rather to excite than to satisfy our curiosity. In a small town in
      Phrygia, of whose names as well as situation we are left ignorant, it
      should seem that the magistrates and the body of the people had embraced
      the Christian faith; and as some resistance might be apprehended to the
      execution of the edict, the governor of the province was supported by a
      numerous detachment of legionaries. On their approach the citizens threw
      themselves into the church, with the resolution either of defending by
      arms that sacred edifice, or of perishing in its ruins. They indignantly
      rejected the notice and permission which was given them to retire, till
      the soldiers, provoked by their obstinate refusal, set fire to the
      building on all sides, and consumed, by this extraordinary kind of
      martyrdom, a great number of Phrygians, with their wives and children. <a href="#Blinknote-161" id="Blinknoteref-161" name="Blinknoteref-161">161</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-160" name="Blinknote-160">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      160 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-160">return</a>)<br/> [ The ancient monuments,
      published at the end of Optatus, p. 261, &amp;c. describe, in a very
      circumstantial manner, the proceedings of the governors in the destruction
      of churches. They made a minute inventory of the plate, &amp;c., which
      they found in them. That of the church of Cirta, in Numidia, is still
      extant. It consisted of two chalices of gold, and six of silver; six urns,
      one kettle, seven lamps, all likewise of silver; besides a large quantity
      of brass utensils, and wearing apparel.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-161" name="Blinknote-161">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      161 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-161">return</a>)<br/> [ Lactantius (Institut.
      Divin. v. 11) confines the calamity to the conventiculum, with its
      congregation. Eusebius (viii. 11) extends it to a whole city, and
      introduces something very like a regular siege. His ancient Latin
      translator, Rufinus, adds the important circumstance of the permission
      given to the inhabitants of retiring from thence. As Phrygia reached to
      the confines of Isauria, it is possible that the restless temper of those
      independent barbarians may have contributed to this misfortune. Note:
      Universum populum. Lact. Inst. Div. v. 11.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
      Some slight disturbances, though they were suppressed almost as soon as
      excited, in Syria and the frontiers of Armenia, afforded the enemies of
      the church a very plausible occasion to insinuate, that those troubles had
      been secretly fomented by the intrigues of the bishops, who had already
      forgotten their ostentatious professions of passive and unlimited
      obedience. <a href="#Blinknote-162" id="Blinknoteref-162" name="Blinknoteref-162">162</a>
</p>
<p>
      The resentment, or the fears, of Diocletian, at length transported him
      beyond the bounds of moderation, which he had hitherto preserved, and he
      declared, in a series of cruel edicts, <a href="#Blinknote-1621" id="Blinknoteref-1621" name="Blinknoteref-1621">1621</a> his intention of
      abolishing the Christian name. By the first of these edicts, the governors
      of the provinces were directed to apprehend all persons of the
      ecclesiastical order; and the prisons, destined for the vilest criminals,
      were soon filled with a multitude of bishops, presbyters, deacons,
      readers, and exorcists. By a second edict, the magistrates were commanded
      to employ every method of severity, which might reclaim them from their
      odious superstition, and oblige them to return to the established worship
      of the gods. This rigorous order was extended, by a subsequent edict, to
      the whole body of Christians, who were exposed to a violent and general
      persecution. <a href="#Blinknote-163" id="Blinknoteref-163" name="Blinknoteref-163">163</a>
</p>
<p>
      Instead of those salutary restraints, which had required the direct and
      solemn testimony of an accuser, it became the duty as well as the interest
      of the Imperial officers to discover, to pursue, and to torment the most
      obnoxious among the faithful. Heavy penalties were denounced against all
      who should presume to save a prescribed sectary from the just indignation
      of the gods, and of the emperors. Yet, notwithstanding the severity of
      this law, the virtuous courage of many of the Pagans, in concealing their
      friends or relations, affords an honorable proof, that the rage of
      superstition had not extinguished in their minds the sentiments of nature
      and humanity. <a href="#Blinknote-164" id="Blinknoteref-164" name="Blinknoteref-164">164</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-162" name="Blinknote-162">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      162 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-162">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, l. viii. c.
      6. M. de Valois (with some probability) thinks that he has discovered the
      Syrian rebellion in an oration of Libanius; and that it was a rash attempt
      of the tribune Eugenius, who with only five hundred men seized Antioch,
      and might perhaps allure the Christians by the promise of religious
      toleration. From Eusebius, (l. ix. c. 8,) as well as from Moses of
      Chorene, (Hist. Armen. l. ii. 77, &amp;c.,) it may be inferred, that
      Christianity was already introduced into Armenia.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1621" name="Blinknote-1621">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1621 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1621">return</a>)<br/> [ He had already passed
      them in his first edict. It does not appear that resentment or fear had
      any share in the new persecutions: perhaps they originated in
      superstition, and a specious apparent respect for its ministers. The
      oracle of Apollo, consulted by Diocletian, gave no answer; and said that
      just men hindered it from speaking. Constantine, who assisted at the
      ceremony, affirms, with an oath, that when questioned about these men, the
      high priest named the Christians. "The Emperor eagerly seized on this
      answer; and drew against the innocent a sword, destined only to punish the
      guilty: he instantly issued edicts, written, if I may use the expression,
      with a poniard; and ordered the judges to employ all their skill to invent
      new modes of punishment. Euseb. Vit Constant. l. ii c 54."—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-163" name="Blinknote-163">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      163 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-163">return</a>)<br/> [ See Mosheim, p. 938:
      the text of Eusebius very plainly shows that the governors, whose powers
      were enlarged, not restrained, by the new laws, could punish with death
      the most obstinate Christians as an example to their brethren.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-164" name="Blinknote-164">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      164 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-164">return</a>)<br/> [ Athanasius, p. 833, ap.
      Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom v part i. 90.]
    </p>
<p>
      Diocletian had no sooner published his edicts against the Christians,
      than, as if he had been desirous of committing to other hands the work of
      persecution, he divested himself of the Imperial purple. The character and
      situation of his colleagues and successors sometimes urged them to enforce
      and sometimes inclined them to suspend, the execution of these rigorous
      laws; nor can we acquire a just and distinct idea of this important period
      of ecclesiastical history, unless we separately consider the state of
      Christianity, in the different parts of the empire, during the space of
      ten years, which elapsed between the first edicts of Diocletian and the
      final peace of the church.
    </p>
<p>
      The mild and humane temper of Constantius was averse to the oppression of
      any part of his subjects. The principal offices of his palace were
      exercised by Christians. He loved their persons, esteemed their fidelity,
      and entertained not any dislike to their religious principles. But as long
      as Constantius remained in the subordinate station of Caesar, it was not
      in his power openly to reject the edicts of Diocletian, or to disobey the
      commands of Maximian. His authority contributed, however, to alleviate the
      sufferings which he pitied and abhorred. He consented with reluctance to
      the ruin of the churches; but he ventured to protect the Christians
      themselves from the fury of the populace, and from the rigor of the laws.
      The provinces of Gaul (under which we may probably include those of
      Britain) were indebted for the singular tranquillity which they enjoyed,
      to the gentle interposition of their sovereign. <a href="#Blinknote-165" id="Blinknoteref-165" name="Blinknoteref-165">165</a> But Datianus, the
      president or governor of Spain, actuated either by zeal or policy, chose
      rather to execute the public edicts of the emperors, than to understand
      the secret intentions of Constantius; and it can scarcely be doubted, that
      his provincial administration was stained with the blood of a few martyrs.
      <a href="#Blinknote-166" id="Blinknoteref-166" name="Blinknoteref-166">166</a>
</p>
<p>
      The elevation of Constantius to the supreme and independent dignity of
      Augustus, gave a free scope to the exercise of his virtues, and the
      shortness of his reign did not prevent him from establishing a system of
      toleration, of which he left the precept and the example to his son
      Constantine. His fortunate son, from the first moment of his accession,
      declaring himself the protector of the church, at length deserved the
      appellation of the first emperor who publicly professed and established
      the Christian religion. The motives of his conversion, as they may
      variously be deduced from benevolence, from policy, from conviction, or
      from remorse, and the progress of the revolution, which, under his
      powerful influence and that of his sons, rendered Christianity the
      reigning religion of the Roman empire, will form a very interesting and
      important chapter in the present volume of this history. At present it may
      be sufficient to observe, that every victory of Constantine was productive
      of some relief or benefit to the church.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-165" name="Blinknote-165">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      165 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-165">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, l. viii. c.
      13. Lactantius de M. P. c. 15. Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprian. xi. 75)
      represents them as inconsistent with each other. But the former evidently
      speaks of Constantius in the station of Caesar, and the latter of the same
      prince in the rank of Augustus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-166" name="Blinknote-166">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      166 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-166">return</a>)<br/> [ Datianus is mentioned,
      in Gruter's Inscriptions, as having determined the limits between the
      territories of Pax Julia, and those of Ebora, both cities in the southern
      part of Lusitania. If we recollect the neighborhood of those places to
      Cape St. Vincent, we may suspect that the celebrated deacon and martyr of
      that name had been inaccurately assigned by Prudentius, &amp;c., to
      Saragossa, or Valentia. See the pompous history of his sufferings, in the
      Memoires de Tillemont, tom. v. part ii. p. 58-85. Some critics are of
      opinion, that the department of Constantius, as Caesar, did not include
      Spain, which still continued under the immediate jurisdiction of
      Maximian.]
    </p>
<p>
      The provinces of Italy and Africa experienced a short but violent
      persecution. The rigorous edicts of Diocletian were strictly and
      cheerfully executed by his associate Maximian, who had long hated the
      Christians, and who delighted in acts of blood and violence. In the autumn
      of the first year of the persecution, the two emperors met at Rome to
      celebrate their triumph; several oppressive laws appear to have issued
      from their secret consultations, and the diligence of the magistrates was
      animated by the presence of their sovereigns. After Diocletian had
      divested himself of the purple, Italy and Africa were administered under
      the name of Severus, and were exposed, without defence, to the implacable
      resentment of his master Galerius. Among the martyrs of Rome, Adauctus
      deserves the notice of posterity. He was of a noble family in Italy, and
      had raised himself, through the successive honors of the palace, to the
      important office of treasurer of the private Jemesnes. Adauctus is the
      more remarkable for being the only person of rank and distinction who
      appears to have suffered death, during the whole course of this general
      persecution. <a href="#Blinknote-167" id="Blinknoteref-167" name="Blinknoteref-167">167</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-167" name="Blinknote-167">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      167 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-167">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, l. viii. c.
      11. Gruter, Inscrip. p. 1171, No. 18. Rufinus has mistaken the office of
      Adauctus, as well as the place of his martyrdom. * Note: M. Guizot
      suggests the powerful cunuchs of the palace. Dorotheus, Gorgonius, and
      Andrew, admitted by Gibbon himself to have been put to death, p. 66.]
    </p>
<p>
      The revolt of Maxentius immediately restored peace to the churches of
      Italy and Africa; and the same tyrant who oppressed every other class of
      his subjects, showed himself just, humane, and even partial, towards the
      afflicted Christians. He depended on their gratitude and affection, and
      very naturally presumed, that the injuries which they had suffered, and
      the dangers which they still apprehended from his most inveterate enemy,
      would secure the fidelity of a party already considerable by their numbers
      and opulence. <a href="#Blinknote-168" id="Blinknoteref-168" name="Blinknoteref-168">168</a> Even the conduct of Maxentius towards the
      bishops of Rome and Carthage may be considered as the proof of his
      toleration, since it is probable that the most orthodox princes would
      adopt the same measures with regard to their established clergy.
      Marcellus, the former of these prelates, had thrown the capital into
      confusion, by the severe penance which he imposed on a great number of
      Christians, who, during the late persecution, had renounced or dissembled
      their religion. The rage of faction broke out in frequent and violent
      seditions; the blood of the faithful was shed by each other's hands, and
      the exile of Marcellus, whose prudence seems to have been less eminent
      than his zeal, was found to be the only measure capable of restoring peace
      to the distracted church of Rome. <a href="#Blinknote-169" id="Blinknoteref-169" name="Blinknoteref-169">169</a> The behavior of
      Mensurius, bishop of Carthage, appears to have been still more
      reprehensible. A deacon of that city had published a libel against the
      emperor. The offender took refuge in the episcopal palace; and though it
      was somewhat early to advance any claims of ecclesiastical immunities, the
      bishop refused to deliver him up to the officers of justice. For this
      treasonable resistance, Mensurius was summoned to court, and instead of
      receiving a legal sentence of death or banishment, he was permitted, after
      a short examination, to return to his diocese. <a href="#Blinknote-170" id="Blinknoteref-170" name="Blinknoteref-170">170</a> Such was the happy
      condition of the Christian subjects of Maxentius, that whenever they were
      desirous of procuring for their own use any bodies of martyrs, they were
      obliged to purchase them from the most distant provinces of the East. A
      story is related of Aglae, a Roman lady, descended from a consular family,
      and possessed of so ample an estate, that it required the management of
      seventy-three stewards. Among these Boniface was the favorite of his
      mistress; and as Aglae mixed love with devotion, it is reported that he
      was admitted to share her bed. Her fortune enabled her to gratify the
      pious desire of obtaining some sacred relics from the East. She intrusted
      Boniface with a considerable sum of gold, and a large quantity of
      aromatics; and her lover, attended by twelve horsemen and three covered
      chariots, undertook a remote pilgrimage, as far as Tarsus in Cilicia. <a href="#Blinknote-171" id="Blinknoteref-171" name="Blinknoteref-171">171</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-168" name="Blinknote-168">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      168 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-168">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, l. viii. c.
      14. But as Maxentius was vanquished by Constantine, it suited the purpose
      of Lactantius to place his death among those of the persecutors. * Note:
      M. Guizot directly contradicts this statement of Gibbon, and appeals to
      Eusebius. Maxentius, who assumed the power in Italy, pretended at first to
      be a Christian, to gain the favor of the Roman people; he ordered his
      ministers to cease to persecute the Christians, affecting a hypocritical
      piety, in order to appear more mild than his predecessors; but his actions
      soon proved that he was very different from what they had at first hoped.
      The actions of Maxentius were those of a cruel tyrant, but not those of a
      persecutor: the Christians, like the rest of his subjects, suffered from
      his vices, but they were not oppressed as a sect. Christian females were
      exposed to his lusts, as well as to the brutal violence of his colleague
      Maximian, but they were not selected as Christians.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-169" name="Blinknote-169">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      169 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-169">return</a>)<br/> [ The epitaph of
      Marcellus is to be found in Gruter, Inscrip. p 1172, No. 3, and it
      contains all that we know of his history. Marcellinus and Marcellus, whose
      names follow in the list of popes, are supposed by many critics to be
      different persons; but the learned Abbe de Longuerue was convinced that
      they were one and the same. Veridicus rector lapsis quia crimina flere
      Praedixit miseris, fuit omnibus hostis amarus. Hinc furor, hinc odium;
      sequitur discordia, lites, Seditio, caedes; solvuntur foedera pacis.
      Crimen ob alterius, Christum qui in pace negavit Finibus expulsus patriae
      est feritate Tyranni. Haec breviter Damasus voluit comperta referre:
      Marcelli populus meritum cognoscere posset.——We may observe
      that Damasus was made Bishop of Rome, A. D. 366.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-170" name="Blinknote-170">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      170 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-170">return</a>)<br/> [ Optatus contr.
      Donatist. l. i. c. 17, 18. * Note: The words of Optatus are, Profectus
      (Roman) causam dixit; jussus con reverti Carthaginem; perhaps, in pleading
      his cause, he exculpated himself, since he received an order to return to
      Carthage.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-171" name="Blinknote-171">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      171 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-171">return</a>)<br/> [ The Acts of the Passion
      of St. Boniface, which abound in miracles and declamation, are published
      by Ruinart, (p. 283—291,) both in Greek and Latin, from the
      authority of very ancient manuscripts. Note: We are ignorant whether Aglae
      and Boniface were Christians at the time of their unlawful connection. See
      Tillemont. Mem, Eccles. Note on the Persecution of Domitian, tom. v. note
      82. M. de Tillemont proves also that the history is doubtful.—G.
      ——Sir D. Dalrymple (Lord Hailes) calls the story of Aglae and
      Boniface as of equal authority with our popular histories of Whittington
      and Hickathrift. Christian Antiquities, ii. 64.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The sanguinary temper of Galerius, the first and principal author of the
      persecution, was formidable to those Christians whom their misfortunes had
      placed within the limits of his dominions; and it may fairly be presumed
      that many persons of a middle rank, who were not confined by the chains
      either of wealth or of poverty, very frequently deserted their native
      country, and sought a refuge in the milder climate of the West. <a href="#Blinknote-1711" id="Blinknoteref-1711" name="Blinknoteref-1711">1711</a>
      As long as he commanded only the armies and provinces of Illyricum, he
      could with difficulty either find or make a considerable number of
      martyrs, in a warlike country, which had entertained the missionaries of
      the gospel with more coldness and reluctance than any other part of the
      empire. <a href="#Blinknote-172" id="Blinknoteref-172" name="Blinknoteref-172">172</a>
      But when Galerius had obtained the supreme power, and the government of
      the East, he indulged in their fullest extent his zeal and cruelty, not
      only in the provinces of Thrace and Asia, which acknowledged his immediate
      jurisdiction, but in those of Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, where Maximin
      gratified his own inclination, by yielding a rigorous obedience to the
      stern commands of his benefactor. <a href="#Blinknote-173" id="Blinknoteref-173" name="Blinknoteref-173">173</a> The frequent
      disappointments of his ambitious views, the experience of six years of
      persecution, and the salutary reflections which a lingering and painful
      distemper suggested to the mind of Galerius, at length convinced him that
      the most violent efforts of despotism are insufficient to extirpate a
      whole people, or to subdue their religious prejudices. Desirous of
      repairing the mischief that he had occasioned, he published in his own
      name, and in those of Licinius and Constantine, a general edict, which,
      after a pompous recital of the Imperial titles, proceeded in the following
      manner:—
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1711" name="Blinknote-1711">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1711 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1711">return</a>)<br/> [ A little after this,
      Christianity was propagated to the north of the Roman provinces, among the
      tribes of Germany: a multitude of Christians, forced by the persecutions
      of the Emperors to take refuge among the Barbarians, were received with
      kindness. Euseb. de Vit. Constant. ii. 53. Semler Select. cap. H. E. p.
      115. The Goths owed their first knowledge of Christianity to a young girl,
      a prisoner of war; she continued in the midst of them her exercises of
      piety; she fasted, prayed, and praised God day and night. When she was
      asked what good would come of so much painful trouble she answered, "It is
      thus that Christ, the Son of God, is to be honored." Sozomen, ii. c. 6.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-172" name="Blinknote-172">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      172 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-172">return</a>)<br/> [ During the four first
      centuries, there exist few traces of either bishops or bishoprics in the
      western Illyricum. It has been thought probable that the primate of Milan
      extended his jurisdiction over Sirmium, the capital of that great
      province. See the Geographia Sacra of Charles de St. Paul, p. 68-76, with
      the observations of Lucas Holstenius.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-173" name="Blinknote-173">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      173 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-173">return</a>)<br/> [ The viiith book of
      Eusebius, as well as the supplement concerning the martyrs of Palestine,
      principally relate to the persecution of Galerius and Maximin. The general
      lamentations with which Lactantius opens the vth book of his Divine
      Institutions allude to their cruelty.] "Among the important cares which
      have occupied our mind for the utility and preservation of the empire, it
      was our intention to correct and reestablish all things according to the
      ancient laws and public discipline of the Romans. We were particularly
      desirous of reclaiming into the way of reason and nature, the deluded
      Christians who had renounced the religion and ceremonies instituted by
      their fathers; and presumptuously despising the practice of antiquity, had
      invented extravagant laws and opinions, according to the dictates of their
      fancy, and had collected a various society from the different provinces of
      our empire. The edicts, which we have published to enforce the worship of
      the gods, having exposed many of the Christians to danger and distress,
      many having suffered death, and many more, who still persist in their
      impious folly, being left destitute of any public exercise of religion, we
      are disposed to extend to those unhappy men the effects of our wonted
      clemency. We permit them therefore freely to profess their private
      opinions, and to assemble in their conventicles without fear or
      molestation, provided always that they preserve a due respect to the
      established laws and government. By another rescript we shall signify our
      intentions to the judges and magistrates; and we hope that our indulgence
      will engage the Christians to offer up their prayers to the Deity whom
      they adore, for our safety and prosperity for their own, and for that of
      the republic." <a href="#Blinknote-174" id="Blinknoteref-174" name="Blinknoteref-174">174</a> It is not usually in the language of edicts
      and manifestos that we should search for the real character or the secret
      motives of princes; but as these were the words of a dying emperor, his
      situation, perhaps, may be admitted as a pledge of his sincerity.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-174" name="Blinknote-174">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      174 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-174">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius (l. viii. c.
      17) has given us a Greek version, and Lactantius (de M. P. c. 34) the
      Latin original, of this memorable edict. Neither of these writers seems to
      recollect how directly it contradicts whatever they have just affirmed of
      the remorse and repentance of Galerius. Note: But Gibbon has answered this
      by his just observation, that it is not in the language of edicts and
      manifestos that we should search * * for the secre motives of princes.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      When Galerius subscribed this edict of toleration, he was well assured
      that Licinius would readily comply with the inclinations of his friend and
      benefactor, and that any measures in favor of the Christians would obtain
      the approbation of Constantine. But the emperor would not venture to
      insert in the preamble the name of Maximin, whose consent was of the
      greatest importance, and who succeeded a few days afterwards to the
      provinces of Asia. In the first six months, however, of his new reign,
      Maximin affected to adopt the prudent counsels of his predecessor; and
      though he never condescended to secure the tranquillity of the church by a
      public edict, Sabinus, his Praetorian praefect, addressed a circular
      letter to all the governors and magistrates of the provinces, expatiating
      on the Imperial clemency, acknowledging the invincible obstinacy of the
      Christians, and directing the officers of justice to cease their
      ineffectual prosecutions, and to connive at the secret assemblies of those
      enthusiasts. In consequence of these orders, great numbers of Christians
      were released from prison, or delivered from the mines. The confessors,
      singing hymns of triumph, returned into their own countries; and those who
      had yielded to the violence of the tempest, solicited with tears of
      repentance their readmission into the bosom of the church. <a href="#Blinknote-175" id="Blinknoteref-175" name="Blinknoteref-175">175</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-175" name="Blinknote-175">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      175 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-175">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius, l. ix. c. 1.
      He inserts the epistle of the praefect.]
    </p>
<p>
      But this treacherous calm was of short duration; nor could the Christians
      of the East place any confidence in the character of their sovereign.
      Cruelty and superstition were the ruling passions of the soul of Maximin.
      The former suggested the means, the latter pointed out the objects of
      persecution. The emperor was devoted to the worship of the gods, to the
      study of magic, and to the belief of oracles. The prophets or
      philosophers, whom he revered as the favorites of Heaven, were frequently
      raised to the government of provinces, and admitted into his most secret
      councils. They easily convinced him that the Christians had been indebted
      for their victories to their regular discipline, and that the weakness of
      polytheism had principally flowed from a want of union and subordination
      among the ministers of religion. A system of government was therefore
      instituted, which was evidently copied from the policy of the church. In
      all the great cities of the empire, the temples were repaired and
      beautified by the order of Maximin, and the officiating priests of the
      various deities were subjected to the authority of a superior pontiff
      destined to oppose the bishop, and to promote the cause of paganism. These
      pontiffs acknowledged, in their turn, the supreme jurisdiction of the
      metropolitans or high priests of the province, who acted as the immediate
      vicegerents of the emperor himself. A white robe was the ensign of their
      dignity; and these new prelates were carefully selected from the most
      noble and opulent families. By the influence of the magistrates, and of
      the sacerdotal order, a great number of dutiful addresses were obtained,
      particularly from the cities of Nicomedia, Antioch, and Tyre, which
      artfully represented the well-known intentions of the court as the general
      sense of the people; solicited the emperor to consult the laws of justice
      rather than the dictates of his clemency; expressed their abhorrence of
      the Christians, and humbly prayed that those impious sectaries might at
      least be excluded from the limits of their respective territories. The
      answer of Maximin to the address which he obtained from the citizens of
      Tyre is still extant. He praises their zeal and devotion in terms of the
      highest satisfaction, descants on the obstinate impiety of the Christians,
      and betrays, by the readiness with which he consents to their banishment,
      that he considered himself as receiving, rather than as conferring, an
      obligation. The priests as well as the magistrates were empowered to
      enforce the execution of his edicts, which were engraved on tables of
      brass; and though it was recommended to them to avoid the effusion of
      blood, the most cruel and ignominious punishments were inflicted on the
      refractory Christians. <a href="#Blinknote-176" id="Blinknoteref-176" name="Blinknoteref-176">176</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-176" name="Blinknote-176">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      176 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-176">return</a>)<br/> [ See Eusebius, l. viii.
      c. 14, l. ix. c. 2—8. Lactantius de M. P. c. 36. These writers agree
      in representing the arts of Maximin; but the former relates the execution
      of several martyrs, while the latter expressly affirms, occidi servos Dei
      vetuit. * Note: It is easy to reconcile them; it is sufficient to quote
      the entire text of Lactantius: Nam cum clementiam specie tenus
      profiteretur, occidi servos Dei vetuit, debilitari jussit. Itaque
      confessoribus effodiebantur oculi, amputabantur manus, nares vel auriculae
      desecabantur. Haec ille moliens Constantini litteris deterretur.
      Dissimulavit ergo, et tamen, si quis inciderit. mari occulte mergebatur.
      This detail of torments inflicted on the Christians easily reconciles
      Lactantius and Eusebius. Those who died in consequence of their tortures,
      those who were plunged into the sea, might well pass for martyrs. The
      mutilation of the words of Lactantius has alone given rise to the apparent
      contradiction.—G. ——Eusebius. ch. vi., relates the
      public martyrdom of the aged bishop of Emesa, with two others, who were
      thrown to the wild beasts, the beheading of Peter, bishop of Alexandria,
      with several others, and the death of Lucian, presbyter of Antioch, who
      was carried to Numidia, and put to death in prison. The contradiction is
      direct and undeniable, for although Eusebius may have misplaced the former
      martyrdoms, it may be doubted whether the authority of Maximin extended to
      Nicomedia till after the death of Galerius. The last edict of toleration
      issued by Maximin and published by Eusebius himself, Eccl. Hist. ix. 9.
      confirms the statement of Lactantius.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The Asiatic Christians had every thing to dread from the severity of a
      bigoted monarch who prepared his measures of violence with such deliberate
      policy. But a few months had scarcely elapsed before the edicts published
      by the two Western emperors obliged Maximin to suspend the prosecution of
      his designs: the civil war which he so rashly undertook against Licinius
      employed all his attention; and the defeat and death of Maximin soon
      delivered the church from the last and most implacable of her enemies. <a href="#Blinknote-177" id="Blinknoteref-177" name="Blinknoteref-177">177</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-177" name="Blinknote-177">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      177 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-177">return</a>)<br/> [ A few days before his
      death, he published a very ample edict of toleration, in which he imputes
      all the severities which the Christians suffered to the judges and
      governors, who had misunderstood his intentions.See the edict of Eusebius,
      l. ix. c. 10.]
    </p>
<p>
      In this general view of the persecution, which was first authorized by the
      edicts of Diocletian, I have purposely refrained from describing the
      particular sufferings and deaths of the Christian martyrs. It would have
      been an easy task, from the history of Eusebius, from the declamations of
      Lactantius, and from the most ancient acts, to collect a long series of
      horrid and disgustful pictures, and to fill many pages with racks and
      scourges, with iron hooks and red-hot beds, and with all the variety of
      tortures which fire and steel, savage beasts, and more savage
      executioners, could inflict upon the human body. These melancholy scenes
      might be enlivened by a crowd of visions and miracles destined either to
      delay the death, to celebrate the triumph, or to discover the relics of
      those canonized saints who suffered for the name of Christ. But I cannot
      determine what I ought to transcribe, till I am satisfied how much I ought
      to believe. The gravest of the ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius
      himself, indirectly confesses, that he has related whatever might redound
      to the glory, and that he has suppressed all that could tend to the
      disgrace, of religion. <a href="#Blinknote-178" id="Blinknoteref-178" name="Blinknoteref-178">178</a> Such an acknowledgment will naturally excite
      a suspicion that a writer who has so openly violated one of the
      fundamental laws of history, has not paid a very strict regard to the
      observance of the other; and the suspicion will derive additional credit
      from the character of Eusebius, <a href="#Blinknote-1781" id="Blinknoteref-1781" name="Blinknoteref-1781">1781</a> which was less
      tinctured with credulity, and more practised in the arts of courts, than
      that of almost any of his contemporaries. On some particular occasions,
      when the magistrates were exasperated by some personal motives of interest
      or resentment, the rules of prudence, and perhaps of decency, to overturn
      the altars, to pour out imprecations against the emperors, or to strike
      the judge as he sat on his tribunal, it may be presumed, that every mode
      of torture which cruelty could invent, or constancy could endure, was
      exhausted on those devoted victims. <a href="#Blinknote-179" id="Blinknoteref-179" name="Blinknoteref-179">179</a> Two circumstances,
      however, have been unwarily mentioned, which insinuate that the general
      treatment of the Christians, who had been apprehended by the officers of
      justice, was less intolerable than it is usually imagined to have been. 1.
      The confessors who were condemned to work in the mines were permitted by
      the humanity or the negligence of their keepers to build chapels, and
      freely to profess their religion in the midst of those dreary habitations.
      <a href="#Blinknote-180" id="Blinknoteref-180" name="Blinknoteref-180">180</a>
      2. The bishops were obliged to check and to censure the forward zeal of
      the Christians, who voluntarily threw themselves into the hands of the
      magistrates. Some of these were persons oppressed by poverty and debts,
      who blindly sought to terminate a miserable existence by a glorious death.
      Others were allured by the hope that a short confinement would expiate the
      sins of a whole life; and others again were actuated by the less honorable
      motive of deriving a plentiful subsistence, and perhaps a considerable
      profit, from the alms which the charity of the faithful bestowed on the
      prisoners. <a href="#Blinknote-181" id="Blinknoteref-181" name="Blinknoteref-181">181</a> After the church had triumphed over all her
      enemies, the interest as well as vanity of the captives prompted them to
      magnify the merit of their respective sufferings. A convenient distance of
      time or place gave an ample scope to the progress of fiction; and the
      frequent instances which might be alleged of holy martyrs, whose wounds
      had been instantly healed, whose strength had been renewed, and whose lost
      members had miraculously been restored, were extremely convenient for the
      purpose of removing every difficulty, and of silencing every objection.
      The most extravagant legends, as they conduced to the honor of the church,
      were applauded by the credulous multitude, countenanced by the power of
      the clergy, and attested by the suspicious evidence of ecclesiastical
      history.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-178" name="Blinknote-178">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      178 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-178">return</a>)<br/> [ Such is the fair
      deduction from two remarkable passages in Eusebius, l. viii. c. 2, and de
      Martyr. Palestin. c. 12. The prudence of the historian has exposed his own
      character to censure and suspicion. It was well known that he himself had
      been thrown into prison; and it was suggested that he had purchased his
      deliverance by some dishonorable compliance. The reproach was urged in his
      lifetime, and even in his presence, at the council of Tyre. See Tillemont,
      Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. viii. part i. p. 67.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1781" name="Blinknote-1781">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1781 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1781">return</a>)<br/> [ Historical criticism
      does not consist in rejecting indiscriminately all the facts which do not
      agree with a particular system, as Gibbon does in this chapter, in which,
      except at the last extremity, he will not consent to believe a martyrdom.
      Authorities are to be weighed, not excluded from examination. Now, the
      Pagan historians justify in many places the detail which have been
      transmitted to us by the historians of the church, concerning the tortures
      endured by the Christians. Celsus reproaches the Christians with holding
      their assemblies in secret, on account of the fear inspired by their
      sufferings, "for when you are arrested," he says, "you are dragged to
      punishment: and, before you are put to death, you have to suffer all kinds
      of tortures." Origen cont. Cels. l. i. ii. vi. viii. passing. Libanius,
      the panegyrist of Julian, says, while speaking of the Christians. "Those
      who followed a corrupt religion were in continual apprehensions; they
      feared lest Julian should invent tortures still more refined than those to
      which they had been exposed before, as mutilation, burning alive, &amp;c.;
      for the emperors had inflicted upon them all these barbarities." Lib.
      Parent in Julian. ap. Fab. Bib. Graec. No. 9, No. 58, p. 283—G.
      ——This sentence of Gibbon has given rise to several learned
      dissertation: Moller, de Fide Eusebii Caesar, &amp;c., Havniae, 1813.
      Danzius, de Eusebio Caes. Hist. Eccl. Scriptore, ejusque tide historica
      recte aestimanda, &amp;c., Jenae, 1815. Kestner Commentatio de Eusebii
      Hist. Eccles. conditoris auctoritate et fide, &amp;c. See also Reuterdahl,
      de Fontibus Historiae Eccles. Eusebianae, Lond. Goth., 1826. Gibbon's
      inference may appear stronger than the text will warrant, yet it is
      difficult, after reading the passages, to dismiss all suspicion of
      partiality from the mind.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-179" name="Blinknote-179">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      179 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-179">return</a>)<br/> [ The ancient, and
      perhaps authentic, account of the sufferings of Tarachus and his
      companions, (Acta Sincera Ruinart, p. 419—448,) is filled with
      strong expressions of resentment and contempt, which could not fail of
      irritating the magistrate. The behavior of Aedesius to Hierocles, praefect
      of Egypt, was still more extraordinary. Euseb. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 5.
      * Note: M. Guizot states, that the acts of Tarachus and his companion
      contain nothing that appears dictated by violent feelings, (sentiment
      outre.) Nothing can be more painful than the constant attempt of Gibbon
      throughout this discussion, to find some flaw in the virtue and heroism of
      the martyrs, some extenuation for the cruelty of the persecutors. But
      truth must not be sacrificed even to well-grounded moral indignation.
      Though the language of these martyrs is in great part that of calm de
      fiance, of noble firmness, yet there are many expressions which betray
      "resentment and contempt." "Children of Satan, worshippers of Devils," is
      their common appellation of the heathen. One of them calls the judge
      another, one curses, and declares that he will curse the Emperors, as
      pestilential and bloodthirsty tyrants, whom God will soon visit in his
      wrath. On the other hand, though at first they speak the milder language
      of persuasion, the cold barbarity of the judges and officers might surely
      have called forth one sentence of abhorrence from Gibbon. On the first
      unsatisfactory answer, "Break his jaw," is the order of the judge. They
      direct and witness the most excruciating tortures; the people, as M.
      Guizot observers, were so much revolted by the cruelty of Maximus that
      when the martyrs appeared in the amphitheatre, fear seized on all hearts,
      and general murmurs against the unjust judge rank through the assembly. It
      is singular, at least, that Gibbon should have quoted "as probably
      authentic," acts so much embellished with miracle as these of Tarachus
      are, particularly towards the end.—M. * Note: Scarcely were the
      authorities informed of this, than the president of the province, a man,
      says Eusebius, harsh and cruel, banished the confessors, some to Cyprus,
      others to different parts of Palestine, and ordered them to be tormented
      by being set to the most painful labors. Four of them, whom he required to
      abjure their faith and refused, were burnt alive. Euseb. de Mart. Palest.
      c. xiii.—G. Two of these were bishops; a fifth, Silvanus, bishop of
      Gaza, was the last martyr; another, named John was blinded, but used to
      officiate, and recite from memory long passages of the sacred writings—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-180" name="Blinknote-180">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      180 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-180">return</a>)<br/> [ Euseb. de Martyr.
      Palestin. c. 13.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-181" name="Blinknote-181">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      181 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-181">return</a>)<br/> [ Augustin. Collat.
      Carthagin. Dei, iii. c. 13, ap. Tillanant, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom.
      v. part i. p. 46. The controversy with the Donatists, has reflected some,
      though perhaps a partial, light on the history of the African church.]
    </p>
<p>
      The vague descriptions of exile and imprisonment, of pain and torture, are
      so easily exaggerated or softened by the pencil of an artful orator, <a href="#Blinknote-1811" id="Blinknoteref-1811" name="Blinknoteref-1811">1811</a>
      that we are naturally induced to inquire into a fact of a more distinct
      and stubborn kind; the number of persons who suffered death in consequence
      of the edicts published by Diocletian, his associates, and his successors.
      The recent legendaries record whole armies and cities, which were at once
      swept away by the undistinguishing rage of persecution. The more ancient
      writers content themselves with pouring out a liberal effusion of loose
      and tragical invectives, without condescending to ascertain the precise
      number of those persons who were permitted to seal with their blood their
      belief of the gospel. From the history of Eusebius, it may, however, be
      collected, that only nine bishops were punished with death; and we are
      assured, by his particular enumeration of the martyrs of Palestine, <a href="#Blinknote-182" id="Blinknoteref-182" name="Blinknoteref-182">182</a>
      that no more than ninety-two Christians were entitled to that honorable
      appellation. <a href="#Blinknote-1821" id="Blinknoteref-1821" name="Blinknoteref-1821">1821</a> As we are unacquainted with the degree of
      episcopal zeal and courage which prevailed at that time, it is not in our
      power to draw any useful inferences from the former of these facts: but
      the latter may serve to justify a very important and probable conclusion.
      According to the distribution of Roman provinces, Palestine may be
      considered as the sixteenth part of the Eastern empire: <a href="#Blinknote-183" id="Blinknoteref-183" name="Blinknoteref-183">183</a>
      and since there were some governors, who from a real or affected clemency
      had preserved their hands unstained with the blood of the faithful, <a href="#Blinknote-184" id="Blinknoteref-184" name="Blinknoteref-184">184</a>
      it is reasonable to believe, that the country which had given birth to
      Christianity, produced at least the sixteenth part of the martyrs who
      suffered death within the dominions of Galerius and Maximin; the whole
      might consequently amount to about fifteen hundred, a number which, if it
      is equally divided between the ten years of the persecution, will allow an
      annual consumption of one hundred and fifty martyrs. Allotting the same
      proportion to the provinces of Italy, Africa, and perhaps Spain, where, at
      the end of two or three years, the rigor of the penal laws was either
      suspended or abolished, the multitude of Christians in the Roman empire,
      on whom a capital punishment was inflicted by a judicia, sentence, will be
      reduced to somewhat less than two thousand persons. Since it cannot be
      doubted that the Christians were more numerous, and their enemies more
      exasperated, in the time of Diocletian, than they had ever been in any
      former persecution, this probable and moderate computation may teach us to
      estimate the number of primitive saints and martyrs who sacrificed their
      lives for the important purpose of introducing Christianity into the
      world.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1811" name="Blinknote-1811">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1811 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1811">return</a>)<br/> [ Perhaps there never
      was an instance of an author committing so deliberately the fault which he
      reprobates so strongly in others. What is the dexterous management of the
      more inartificial historians of Christianity, in exaggerating the numbers
      of the martyrs, compared to the unfair address with which Gibbon here
      quietly dismisses from the account all the horrible and excruciating
      tortures which fell short of death? The reader may refer to the xiith
      chapter (book viii.) of Eusebius for the description and for the scenes of
      these tortures.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-182" name="Blinknote-182">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      182 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-182">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius de Martyr.
      Palestin. c. 13. He closes his narration by assuring us that these were
      the martyrdoms inflicted in Palestine, during the whole course of the
      persecution. The 9th chapter of his viiith book, which relates to the
      province of Thebais in Egypt, may seem to contradict our moderate
      computation; but it will only lead us to admire the artful management of
      the historian. Choosing for the scene of the most exquisite cruelty the
      most remote and sequestered country of the Roman empire, he relates that
      in Thebais from ten to one hundred persons had frequently suffered
      martyrdom in the same day. But when he proceeds to mention his own journey
      into Egypt, his language insensibly becomes more cautious and moderate.
      Instead of a large, but definite number, he speaks of many Christians, and
      most artfully selects two ambiguous words, which may signify either what
      he had seen, or what he had heard; either the expectation, or the
      execution of the punishment. Having thus provided a secure evasion, he
      commits the equivocal passage to his readers and translators; justly
      conceiving that their piety would induce them to prefer the most favorable
      sense. There was perhaps some malice in the remark of Theodorus Metochita,
      that all who, like Eusebius, had been conversant with the Egyptians,
      delighted in an obscure and intricate style. (See Valesius ad loc.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1821" name="Blinknote-1821">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1821 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1821">return</a>)<br/> [ This calculation is
      made from the martyrs, of whom Eusebius speaks by name; but he recognizes
      a much greater number. Thus the ninth and tenth chapters of his work are
      entitled, "Of Antoninus, Zebinus, Germanus, and other martyrs; of Peter
      the monk. of Asclepius the Maroionite, and other martyrs." [Are these
      vague contents of chapters very good authority?—M.] Speaking of
      those who suffered under Diocletian, he says, "I will only relate the
      death of one of these, from which, the reader may divine what befell the
      rest." Hist. Eccl. viii. 6. [This relates only to the martyrs in the royal
      household.—M.] Dodwell had made, before Gibbon, this calculation and
      these objections; but Ruinart (Act. Mart. Pref p. 27, et seq.) has
      answered him in a peremptory manner: Nobis constat Eusebium in historia
      infinitos passim martyres admisisse. quamvis revera paucorum nomina
      recensuerit. Nec alium Eusebii interpretem quam ipsummet Eusebium
      proferimus, qui (l. iii. c. 33) ait sub Trajano plurimosa ex fidelibus
      martyrii certamen subiisse (l. v. init.) sub Antonino et Vero
      innumerabiles prope martyres per universum orbem enituisse affirmat. (L.
      vi. c. 1.) Severum persecutionem concitasse refert, in qua per omnes
      ubique locorum Ecclesias, ab athletis pro pietate certantibus, illustria
      confecta fuerunt martyria. Sic de Decii, sic de Valeriani, persecutionibus
      loquitur, quae an Dodwelli faveant conjectionibus judicet aequus lector.
      Even in the persecutions which Gibbon has represented as much more mild
      than that of Diocletian, the number of martyrs appears much greater than
      that to which he limits the martyrs of the latter: and this number is
      attested by incontestable monuments. I will quote but one example. We find
      among the letters of St. Cyprian one from Lucianus to Celerinus, written
      from the depth of a prison, in which Lucianus names seventeen of his
      brethren dead, some in the quarries, some in the midst of tortures some of
      starvation in prison. Jussi sumus (he proceeds) secundum prae ceptum
      imperatoris, fame et siti necari, et reclusi sumus in duabus cellis, ta ut
      nos afficerent fame et siti et ignis vapore.—G.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-183" name="Blinknote-183">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      183 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-183">return</a>)<br/> [ When Palestine was
      divided into three, the praefecture of the East contained forty-eight
      provinces. As the ancient distinctions of nations were long since
      abolished, the Romans distributed the provinces according to a general
      proportion of their extent and opulence.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-184" name="Blinknote-184">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      184 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-184">return</a>)<br/> [ Ut gloriari possint
      nullam se innocentium poremisse, nam et ipse audivi aloquos gloriantes,
      quia administratio sua, in hac paris merit incruenta. Lactant. Institur.
      Divin v. 11.]
    </p>
<p>
      We shall conclude this chapter by a melancholy truth, which obtrudes
      itself on the reluctant mind; that even admitting, without hesitation or
      inquiry, all that history has recorded, or devotion has feigned, on the
      subject of martyrdoms, it must still be acknowledged, that the Christians,
      in the course of their intestine dissensions, have inflicted far greater
      severities on each other, than they had experienced from the zeal of
      infidels. During the ages of ignorance which followed the subversion of
      the Roman empire in the West, the bishops of the Imperial city extended
      their dominion over the laity as well as clergy of the Latin church. The
      fabric of superstition which they had erected, and which might long have
      defied the feeble efforts of reason, was at length assaulted by a crowd of
      daring fanatics, who from the twelfth to the sixteenth century assumed the
      popular character of reformers. The church of Rome defended by violence
      the empire which she had acquired by fraud; a system of peace and
      benevolence was soon disgraced by proscriptions, war, massacres, and the
      institution of the holy office. And as the reformers were animated by the
      love of civil as well as of religious freedom, the Catholic princes
      connected their own interest with that of the clergy, and enforced by fire
      and the sword the terrors of spiritual censures. In the Netherlands alone,
      more than one hundred thousand of the subjects of Charles V. are said to
      have suffered by the hand of the executioner; and this extraordinary
      number is attested by Grotius, <a href="#Blinknote-185" id="Blinknoteref-185" name="Blinknoteref-185">185</a> a man of genius and
      learning, who preserved his moderation amidst the fury of contending
      sects, and who composed the annals of his own age and country, at a time
      when the invention of printing had facilitated the means of intelligence,
      and increased the danger of detection.
    </p>
<p>
      If we are obliged to submit our belief to the authority of Grotius, it
      must be allowed, that the number of Protestants, who were executed in a
      single province and a single reign, far exceeded that of the primitive
      martyrs in the space of three centuries, and of the Roman empire. But if
      the improbability of the fact itself should prevail over the weight of
      evidence; if Grotius should be convicted of exaggerating the merit and
      sufferings of the Reformers; <a href="#Blinknote-186" id="Blinknoteref-186" name="Blinknoteref-186">186</a> we shall be naturally led to inquire what
      confidence can be placed in the doubtful and imperfect monuments of
      ancient credulity; what degree of credit can be assigned to a courtly
      bishop, and a passionate declaimer, <a href="#Blinknote-1861" id="Blinknoteref-1861" name="Blinknoteref-1861">1861</a> who, under the
      protection of Constantine, enjoyed the exclusive privilege of recording
      the persecutions inflicted on the Christians by the vanquished rivals or
      disregarded predecessors of their gracious sovereign.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-185" name="Blinknote-185">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      185 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-185">return</a>)<br/> [ Grot. Annal. de Rebus
      Belgicis, l. i. p. 12, edit. fol.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-186" name="Blinknote-186">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      186 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-186">return</a>)<br/> [ Fra Paola (Istoria del
      Concilio Tridentino, l. iii.) reduces the number of the Belgic martyrs to
      50,000. In learning and moderation Fra Paola was not inferior to Grotius.
      The priority of time gives some advantage to the evidence of the former,
      which he loses, on the other hand, by the distance of Venice from the
      Netherlands.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Blinknote-1861" name="Blinknote-1861">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1861 (<a href="#Blinknoteref-1861">return</a>)<br/> [ Eusebius and the
      author of the Treatise de Mortibus Persecutorum. It is deeply to be
      regretted that the history of this period rest so much on the loose and,
      it must be admitted, by no means scrupulous authority of Eusebius.
      Ecclesiastical history is a solemn and melancholy lesson that the best,
      even the most sacred, cause will eventually the least departure from
      truth!—M.]
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
