<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The Antonines
    </h2>
<h3>
      Introduction.
    </h3>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     The Extent And Military Force Of The Empire In The Age Of
     The Antonines.
</pre>
<p>
      In the second century of the Christian Aera, the empire of Rome
      comprehended the fairest part of the earth, and the most civilized portion
      of mankind. The frontiers of that extensive monarchy were guarded by
      ancient renown and disciplined valor. The gentle but powerful influence of
      laws and manners had gradually cemented the union of the provinces. Their
      peaceful inhabitants enjoyed and abused the advantages of wealth and
      luxury. The image of a free constitution was preserved with decent
      reverence: the Roman senate appeared to possess the sovereign authority,
      and devolved on the emperors all the executive powers of government.
      During a happy period of more than fourscore years, the public
      administration was conducted by the virtue and abilities of Nerva, Trajan,
      Hadrian, and the two Antonines. It is the design of this, and of the two
      succeeding chapters, to describe the prosperous condition of their empire;
      and after wards, from the death of Marcus Antoninus, to deduce the most
      important circumstances of its decline and fall; a revolution which will
      ever be remembered, and is still felt by the nations of the earth.
    </p>
<p>
      The principal conquests of the Romans were achieved under the republic;
      and the emperors, for the most part, were satisfied with preserving those
      dominions which had been acquired by the policy of the senate, the active
      emulations of the consuls, and the martial enthusiasm of the people. The
      seven first centuries were filled with a rapid succession of triumphs; but
      it was reserved for Augustus to relinquish the ambitious design of
      subduing the whole earth, and to introduce a spirit of moderation into the
      public councils. Inclined to peace by his temper and situation, it was
      easy for him to discover that Rome, in her present exalted situation, had
      much less to hope than to fear from the chance of arms; and that, in the
      prosecution of remote wars, the undertaking became every day more
      difficult, the event more doubtful, and the possession more precarious,
      and less beneficial. The experience of Augustus added weight to these
      salutary reflections, and effectually convinced him that, by the prudent
      vigor of his counsels, it would be easy to secure every concession which
      the safety or the dignity of Rome might require from the most formidable
      barbarians. Instead of exposing his person and his legions to the arrows
      of the Parthians, he obtained, by an honorable treaty, the restitution of
      the standards and prisoners which had been taken in the defeat of Crassus.
      <a href="#Alinknote-1a" id="Alinknoteref-1a" name="Alinknoteref-1a">1a</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-1a" name="Alinknote-1a">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-1a">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion Cassius, (l. liv. p.
      736,) with the annotations of Reimar, who has collected all that Roman
      vanity has left upon the subject. The marble of Ancyra, on which Augustus
      recorded his own exploits, asserted that he compelled the Parthians to
      restore the ensigns of Crassus.]
    </p>
<p>
      His generals, in the early part of his reign, attempted the reduction of
      Ethiopia and Arabia Felix. They marched near a thousand miles to the south
      of the tropic; but the heat of the climate soon repelled the invaders, and
      protected the un-warlike natives of those sequestered regions. <a href="#Alinknote-2c" id="Alinknoteref-2c" name="Alinknoteref-2c">2c</a> The
      northern countries of Europe scarcely deserved the expense and labor of
      conquest. The forests and morasses of Germany were filled with a hardy
      race of barbarians, who despised life when it was separated from freedom;
      and though, on the first attack, they seemed to yield to the weight of the
      Roman power, they soon, by a signal act of despair, regained their
      independence, and reminded Augustus of the vicissitude of fortune. <a href="#Alinknote-3a" id="Alinknoteref-3a" name="Alinknoteref-3a">3a</a> On
      the death of that emperor, his testament was publicly read in the senate.
      He bequeathed, as a valuable legacy to his successors, the advice of
      confining the empire within those limits which nature seemed to have
      placed as its permanent bulwarks and boundaries: on the west, the Atlantic
      Ocean; the Rhine and Danube on the north; the Euphrates on the east; and
      towards the south, the sandy deserts of Arabia and Africa. <a href="#Alinknote-4a" id="Alinknoteref-4a" name="Alinknoteref-4a">4a</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-2c" name="Alinknote-2c">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      2c (<a href="#Alinknoteref-2c">return</a>)<br/> [ Strabo, (l. xvi. p. 780,)
      Pliny the elder, (Hist. Natur. l. vi. c. 32, 35, [28, 29,]) and Dion
      Cassius, (l. liii. p. 723, and l. liv. p. 734,) have left us very curious
      details concerning these wars. The Romans made themselves masters of
      Mariaba, or Merab, a city of Arabia Felix, well known to the Orientals.
      (See Abulfeda and the Nubian geography, p. 52.) They were arrived within
      three days' journey of the spice country, the rich object of their
      invasion.
    </p>
<p class="foot">
      Note: It is the city of Merab that the Arabs say was the residence of
      Belkis, queen of Saba, who desired to see Solomon. A dam, by which the
      waters collected in its neighborhood were kept back, having been swept
      away, the sudden inundation destroyed this city, of which, nevertheless,
      vestiges remain. It bordered on a country called Adramout, where a
      particular aromatic plant grows: it is for this reason that we read in the
      history of the Roman expedition, that they were arrived within three days'
      journey of the spice country.—G. Compare Malte-Brun, Geogr. Eng.
      trans. vol. ii. p. 215. The period of this flood has been copiously
      discussed by Reiske, (Program. de vetusta Epocha Arabum, ruptura
      cataractae Merabensis.) Add. Johannsen, Hist. Yemanae, p. 282. Bonn, 1828;
      and see Gibbon, note 16. to Chap. L.—M.
    </p>
<p class="foot">
      Note: Two, according to Strabo. The detailed account of Strabo makes the
      invaders fail before Marsuabae: this cannot be the same place as Mariaba.
      Ukert observes, that Aelius Gallus would not have failed for want of water
      before Mariaba. (See M. Guizot's note above.) "Either, therefore, they
      were different places, or Strabo is mistaken." (Ukert, Geographic der
      Griechen und Romer, vol. i. p. 181.) Strabo, indeed, mentions Mariaba
      distinct from Marsuabae. Gibbon has followed Pliny in reckoning Mariaba
      among the conquests of Gallus. There can be little doubt that he is wrong,
      as Gallus did not approach the capital of Sabaea. Compare the note of the
      Oxford editor of Strabo.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-3a" name="Alinknote-3a">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3a (<a href="#Alinknoteref-3a">return</a>)<br/> [ By the slaughter of Varus
      and his three legions. See the first book of the Annals of Tacitus.
      Sueton. in August. c. 23, and Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 117, &amp;c.
      Augustus did not receive the melancholy news with all the temper and
      firmness that might have been expected from his character.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-4a" name="Alinknote-4a">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4a (<a href="#Alinknoteref-4a">return</a>)<br/> [ Tacit. Annal. l. ii. Dion
      Cassius, l. lvi. p. 833, and the speech of Augustus himself, in Julian's
      Caesars. It receives great light from the learned notes of his French
      translator, M. Spanheim.]
    </p>
<p>
      Happily for the repose of mankind, the moderate system recommended by the
      wisdom of Augustus, was adopted by the fears and vices of his immediate
      successors. Engaged in the pursuit of pleasure, or in the exercise of
      tyranny, the first Caesars seldom showed themselves to the armies, or to
      the provinces; nor were they disposed to suffer, that those triumphs which
      their indolence neglected, should be usurped by the conduct and valor of
      their lieutenants. The military fame of a subject was considered as an
      insolent invasion of the Imperial prerogative; and it became the duty, as
      well as interest, of every Roman general, to guard the frontiers intrusted
      to his care, without aspiring to conquests which might have proved no less
      fatal to himself than to the vanquished barbarians. <a href="#Alinknote-5" id="Alinknoteref-5" name="Alinknoteref-5">5</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-5" name="Alinknote-5">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-5">return</a>)<br/> [ Germanicus, Suetonius
      Paulinus, and Agricola were checked and recalled in the course of their
      victories. Corbulo was put to death. Military merit, as it is admirably
      expressed by Tacitus, was, in the strictest sense of the word, imperatoria
      virtus.]
    </p>
<p>
      The only accession which the Roman empire received, during the first
      century of the Christian Aera, was the province of Britain. In this single
      instance, the successors of Caesar and Augustus were persuaded to follow
      the example of the former, rather than the precept of the latter. The
      proximity of its situation to the coast of Gaul seemed to invite their
      arms; the pleasing though doubtful intelligence of a pearl fishery,
      attracted their avarice; <a href="#Alinknote-6" id="Alinknoteref-6" name="Alinknoteref-6">6</a> and as Britain was viewed in the light of a
      distinct and insulated world, the conquest scarcely formed any exception
      to the general system of continental measures. After a war of about forty
      years, undertaken by the most stupid, <a href="#Alinknote-7" id="Alinknoteref-7" name="Alinknoteref-7">7</a> maintained by the most
      dissolute, and terminated by the most timid of all the emperors, the far
      greater part of the island submitted to the Roman yoke. <a href="#Alinknote-8" id="Alinknoteref-8" name="Alinknoteref-8">8</a> The
      various tribes of Britain possessed valor without conduct, and the love of
      freedom without the spirit of union. They took up arms with savage
      fierceness; they laid them down, or turned them against each other, with
      wild inconsistency; and while they fought singly, they were successively
      subdued. Neither the fortitude of Caractacus, nor the despair of Boadicea,
      nor the fanaticism of the Druids, could avert the slavery of their
      country, or resist the steady progress of the Imperial generals, who
      maintained the national glory, when the throne was disgraced by the
      weakest, or the most vicious of mankind. At the very time when Domitian,
      confined to his palace, felt the terrors which he inspired, his legions,
      under the command of the virtuous Agricola, defeated the collected force
      of the Caledonians, at the foot of the Grampian Hills; and his fleets,
      venturing to explore an unknown and dangerous navigation, displayed the
      Roman arms round every part of the island. The conquest of Britain was
      considered as already achieved; and it was the design of Agricola to
      complete and insure his success, by the easy reduction of Ireland, for
      which, in his opinion, one legion and a few auxiliaries were sufficient.
      <a href="#Alinknote-9" id="Alinknoteref-9" name="Alinknoteref-9">9</a> The
      western isle might be improved into a valuable possession, and the Britons
      would wear their chains with the less reluctance, if the prospect and
      example of freedom were on every side removed from before their eyes.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-6" name="Alinknote-6">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-6">return</a>)<br/> [ Caesar himself conceals
      that ignoble motive; but it is mentioned by Suetonius, c. 47. The British
      pearls proved, however, of little value, on account of their dark and
      livid color. Tacitus observes, with reason, (in Agricola, c. 12,) that it
      was an inherent defect. "Ego facilius crediderim, naturam margaritis
      deesse quam nobis avaritiam."]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-7" name="Alinknote-7">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      7 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-7">return</a>)<br/> [ Claudius, Nero, and
      Domitian. A hope is expressed by Pomponius Mela, l. iii. c. 6, (he wrote
      under Claudius,) that, by the success of the Roman arms, the island and
      its savage inhabitants would soon be better known. It is amusing enough to
      peruse such passages in the midst of London.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-8" name="Alinknote-8">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-8">return</a>)<br/> [ See the admirable
      abridgment given by Tacitus, in the life of Agricola, and copiously,
      though perhaps not completely, illustrated by our own antiquarians, Camden
      and Horsley.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-9" name="Alinknote-9">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      9 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-9">return</a>)<br/> [ The Irish writers, jealous
      of their national honor, are extremely provoked on this occasion, both
      with Tacitus and with Agricola.]
    </p>
<p>
      But the superior merit of Agricola soon occasioned his removal from the
      government of Britain; and forever disappointed this rational, though
      extensive scheme of conquest. Before his departure, the prudent general
      had provided for security as well as for dominion. He had observed, that
      the island is almost divided into two unequal parts by the opposite gulfs,
      or, as they are now called, the Friths of Scotland. Across the narrow
      interval of about forty miles, he had drawn a line of military stations,
      which was afterwards fortified, in the reign of Antoninus Pius, by a turf
      rampart, erected on foundations of stone. <a href="#Alinknote-10" id="Alinknoteref-10" name="Alinknoteref-10">10</a> This wall of Antoninus,
      at a small distance beyond the modern cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow, was
      fixed as the limit of the Roman province. The native Caledonians
      preserved, in the northern extremity of the island, their wild
      independence, for which they were not less indebted to their poverty than
      to their valor. Their incursions were frequently repelled and chastised;
      but their country was never subdued. <a href="#Alinknote-11" id="Alinknoteref-11" name="Alinknoteref-11">11</a> The masters of the
      fairest and most wealthy climates of the globe turned with contempt from
      gloomy hills, assailed by the winter tempest, from lakes concealed in a
      blue mist, and from cold and lonely heaths, over which the deer of the
      forest were chased by a troop of naked barbarians. <a href="#Alinknote-12" id="Alinknoteref-12" name="Alinknoteref-12">12</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-10" name="Alinknote-10">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      10 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-10">return</a>)<br/> [ See Horsley's Britannia
      Romana, l. i. c. 10. Note: Agricola fortified the line from Dumbarton to
      Edinburgh, consequently within Scotland. The emperor Hadrian, during his
      residence in Britain, about the year 121, caused a rampart of earth to be
      raised between Newcastle and Carlisle. Antoninus Pius, having gained new
      victories over the Caledonians, by the ability of his general, Lollius,
      Urbicus, caused a new rampart of earth to be constructed between Edinburgh
      and Dumbarton. Lastly, Septimius Severus caused a wall of stone to be
      built parallel to the rampart of Hadrian, and on the same locality. See
      John Warburton's Vallum Romanum, or the History and Antiquities of the
      Roman Wall. London, 1754, 4to.—W. See likewise a good note on the
      Roman wall in Lingard's History of England, vol. i. p. 40, 4to edit—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-11" name="Alinknote-11">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      11 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-11">return</a>)<br/> [ The poet Buchanan
      celebrates with elegance and spirit (see his Sylvae, v.) the unviolated
      independence of his native country. But, if the single testimony of
      Richard of Cirencester was sufficient to create a Roman province of
      Vespasiana to the north of the wall, that independence would be reduced
      within very narrow limits.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-12" name="Alinknote-12">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      12 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-12">return</a>)<br/> [ See Appian (in Prooem.)
      and the uniform imagery of Ossian's Poems, which, according to every
      hypothesis, were composed by a native Caledonian.]
    </p>
<p>
      Such was the state of the Roman frontiers, and such the maxims of Imperial
      policy, from the death of Augustus to the accession of Trajan. That
      virtuous and active prince had received the education of a soldier, and
      possessed the talents of a general. <a href="#Alinknote-13" id="Alinknoteref-13" name="Alinknoteref-13">13</a> The peaceful system of
      his predecessors was interrupted by scenes of war and conquest; and the
      legions, after a long interval, beheld a military emperor at their head.
      The first exploits of Trajan were against the Dacians, the most warlike of
      men, who dwelt beyond the Danube, and who, during the reign of Domitian,
      had insulted, with impunity, the Majesty of Rome. <a href="#Alinknote-14" id="Alinknoteref-14" name="Alinknoteref-14">14</a> To the strength and
      fierceness of barbarians they added a contempt for life, which was derived
      from a warm persuasion of the immortality and transmigration of the soul.
      <a href="#Alinknote-15" id="Alinknoteref-15" name="Alinknoteref-15">15</a>
      Decebalus, the Dacian king, approved himself a rival not unworthy of
      Trajan; nor did he despair of his own and the public fortune, till, by the
      confession of his enemies, he had exhausted every resource both of valor
      and policy. <a href="#Alinknote-16" id="Alinknoteref-16" name="Alinknoteref-16">16</a> This memorable war, with a very short
      suspension of hostilities, lasted five years; and as the emperor could
      exert, without control, the whole force of the state, it was terminated by
      an absolute submission of the barbarians. <a href="#Alinknote-17" id="Alinknoteref-17" name="Alinknoteref-17">17</a> The new province of
      Dacia, which formed a second exception to the precept of Augustus, was
      about thirteen hundred miles in circumference. Its natural boundaries were
      the Niester, the Teyss or Tibiscus, the Lower Danube, and the Euxine Sea.
      The vestiges of a military road may still be traced from the banks of the
      Danube to the neighborhood of Bender, a place famous in modern history,
      and the actual frontier of the Turkish and Russian empires. <a href="#Alinknote-18" id="Alinknoteref-18" name="Alinknoteref-18">18</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-13" name="Alinknote-13">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      13 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-13">return</a>)<br/> [ See Pliny's Panegyric,
      which seems founded on facts.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-14" name="Alinknote-14">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      14 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-14">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion Cassius, l. lxvii.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-15" name="Alinknote-15">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      15 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-15">return</a>)<br/> [ Herodotus, l. iv. c. 94.
      Julian in the Caesars, with Spanheims observations.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-16" name="Alinknote-16">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      16 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-16">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Epist. viii. 9.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-17" name="Alinknote-17">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      17 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-17">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion Cassius, l. lxviii.
      p. 1123, 1131. Julian in Caesaribus Eutropius, viii. 2, 6. Aurelius Victor
      in Epitome.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-18" name="Alinknote-18">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      18 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-18">return</a>)<br/> [ See a Memoir of M.
      d'Anville, on the Province of Dacia, in the Academie des Inscriptions,
      tom. xxviii. p. 444—468.]
    </p>
<p>
      Trajan was ambitious of fame; and as long as mankind shall continue to
      bestow more liberal applause on their destroyers than on their
      benefactors, the thirst of military glory will ever be the vice of the
      most exalted characters. The praises of Alexander, transmitted by a
      succession of poets and historians, had kindled a dangerous emulation in
      the mind of Trajan. Like him, the Roman emperor undertook an expedition
      against the nations of the East; but he lamented with a sigh, that his
      advanced age scarcely left him any hopes of equalling the renown of the
      son of Philip. <a href="#Alinknote-19" id="Alinknoteref-19" name="Alinknoteref-19">19</a> Yet the success of Trajan, however transient,
      was rapid and specious. The degenerate Parthians, broken by intestine
      discord, fled before his arms. He descended the River Tigris in triumph,
      from the mountains of Armenia to the Persian Gulf. He enjoyed the honor of
      being the first, as he was the last, of the Roman generals, who ever
      navigated that remote sea. His fleets ravaged the coast of Arabia; and
      Trajan vainly flattered himself that he was approaching towards the
      confines of India. <a href="#Alinknote-20" id="Alinknoteref-20" name="Alinknoteref-20">20</a> Every day the astonished senate received the
      intelligence of new names and new nations, that acknowledged his sway.
      They were informed that the kings of Bosphorus, Colchos, Iberia, Albania,
      Osrhoene, and even the Parthian monarch himself, had accepted their
      diadems from the hands of the emperor; that the independent tribes of the
      Median and Carduchian hills had implored his protection; and that the rich
      countries of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, were reduced into the
      state of provinces. <a href="#Alinknote-21" id="Alinknoteref-21" name="Alinknoteref-21">21</a> But the death of Trajan soon clouded the
      splendid prospect; and it was justly to be dreaded, that so many distant
      nations would throw off the unaccustomed yoke, when they were no longer
      restrained by the powerful hand which had imposed it.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-19" name="Alinknote-19">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      19 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-19">return</a>)<br/> [ Trajan's sentiments are
      represented in a very just and lively manner in the Caesars of Julian.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-20" name="Alinknote-20">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      20 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-20">return</a>)<br/> [ Eutropius and Sextus
      Rufus have endeavored to perpetuate the illusion. See a very sensible
      dissertation of M. Freret in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxi. p.
      55.] <a id="Alinknote-21" name="Alinknote-21">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      21 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-21">return</a>)<br/> [Dion Cassius, l. lxviii.;
      and the Abbreviators.]
    </p>
<p>
      It was an ancient tradition, that when the Capitol was founded by one of
      the Roman kings, the god Terminus (who presided over boundaries, and was
      represented, according to the fashion of that age, by a large stone)
      alone, among all the inferior deities, refused to yield his place to
      Jupiter himself. A favorable inference was drawn from his obstinacy, which
      was interpreted by the augurs as a sure presage that the boundaries of the
      Roman power would never recede. <a href="#Alinknote-22" id="Alinknoteref-22" name="Alinknoteref-22">22</a> During many ages, the
      prediction, as it is usual, contributed to its own accomplishment. But
      though Terminus had resisted the Majesty of Jupiter, he submitted to the
      authority of the emperor Hadrian. <a href="#Alinknote-23" id="Alinknoteref-23" name="Alinknoteref-23">23</a> The resignation of all
      the eastern conquests of Trajan was the first measure of his reign. He
      restored to the Parthians the election of an independent sovereign;
      withdrew the Roman garrisons from the provinces of Armenia, Mesopotamia,
      and Assyria; and, in compliance with the precept of Augustus, once more
      established the Euphrates as the frontier of the empire. <a href="#Alinknote-24" id="Alinknoteref-24" name="Alinknoteref-24">24</a>
      Censure, which arraigns the public actions and the private motives of
      princes, has ascribed to envy, a conduct which might be attributed to the
      prudence and moderation of Hadrian. The various character of that emperor,
      capable, by turns, of the meanest and the most generous sentiments, may
      afford some color to the suspicion. It was, however, scarcely in his power
      to place the superiority of his predecessor in a more conspicuous light,
      than by thus confessing himself unequal to the task of defending the
      conquests of Trajan.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-22" name="Alinknote-22">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      22 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-22">return</a>)<br/> [ Ovid. Fast. l. ii. ver.
      667. See Livy, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, under the reign of
      Tarquin.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-23" name="Alinknote-23">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      23 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-23">return</a>)<br/> [ St. Augustin is highly
      delighted with the proof of the weakness of Terminus, and the vanity of
      the Augurs. See De Civitate Dei, iv. 29. * Note: The turn of Gibbon's
      sentence is Augustin's: "Plus Hadrianum regem hominum, quam regem Deorum
      timuisse videatur."—M]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-24" name="Alinknote-24">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      24 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-24">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Augustan History,
      p. 5, Jerome's Chronicle, and all the Epitomizers. It is somewhat
      surprising, that this memorable event should be omitted by Dion, or rather
      by Xiphilin.]
    </p>
<p>
      The martial and ambitious of spirit Trajan formed a very singular contrast
      with the moderation of his successor. The restless activity of Hadrian was
      not less remarkable when compared with the gentle repose of Antoninus
      Pius. The life of the former was almost a perpetual journey; and as he
      possessed the various talents of the soldier, the statesman, and the
      scholar, he gratified his curiosity in the discharge of his duty.
    </p>
<p>
      Careless of the difference of seasons and of climates, he marched on foot,
      and bare-headed, over the snows of Caledonia, and the sultry plains of the
      Upper Egypt; nor was there a province of the empire which, in the course
      of his reign, was not honored with the presence of the monarch. <a href="#Alinknote-25" id="Alinknoteref-25" name="Alinknoteref-25">25</a> But
      the tranquil life of Antoninus Pius was spent in the bosom of Italy, and,
      during the twenty-three years that he directed the public administration,
      the longest journeys of that amiable prince extended no farther than from
      his palace in Rome to the retirement of his Lanuvian villa. <a href="#Alinknote-26" id="Alinknoteref-26" name="Alinknoteref-26">26</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-25" name="Alinknote-25">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      25 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-25">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion, l. lxix. p. 1158.
      Hist. August. p. 5, 8. If all our historians were lost, medals,
      inscriptions, and other monuments, would be sufficient to record the
      travels of Hadrian. Note: The journeys of Hadrian are traced in a note on
      Solvet's translation of Hegewisch, Essai sur l'Epoque de Histoire Romaine
      la plus heureuse pour Genre Humain Paris, 1834, p. 123.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-26" name="Alinknote-26">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      26 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-26">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Augustan History
      and the Epitomes.]
    </p>
<p>
      Notwithstanding this difference in their personal conduct, the general
      system of Augustus was equally adopted and uniformly pursued by Hadrian
      and by the two Antonines. They persisted in the design of maintaining the
      dignity of the empire, without attempting to enlarge its limits. By every
      honorable expedient they invited the friendship of the barbarians; and
      endeavored to convince mankind that the Roman power, raised above the
      temptation of conquest, was actuated only by the love of order and
      justice. During a long period of forty-three years, their virtuous labors
      were crowned with success; and if we except a few slight hostilities, that
      served to exercise the legions of the frontier, the reigns of Hadrian and
      Antoninus Pius offer the fair prospect of universal peace. <a href="#Alinknote-27" id="Alinknoteref-27" name="Alinknoteref-27">27</a> The
      Roman name was revered among the most remote nations of the earth. The
      fiercest barbarians frequently submitted their differences to the
      arbitration of the emperor; and we are informed by a contemporary
      historian that he had seen ambassadors who were refused the honor which
      they came to solicit of being admitted into the rank of subjects. <a href="#Alinknote-28" id="Alinknoteref-28" name="Alinknoteref-28">28</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-27" name="Alinknote-27">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      27 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-27">return</a>)<br/> [ We must, however,
      remember, that in the time of Hadrian, a rebellion of the Jews raged with
      religious fury, though only in a single province. Pausanias (l. viii. c.
      43) mentions two necessary and successful wars, conducted by the generals
      of Pius: 1st. Against the wandering Moors, who were driven into the
      solitudes of Atlas. 2d. Against the Brigantes of Britain, who had invaded
      the Roman province. Both these wars (with several other hostilities) are
      mentioned in the Augustan History, p. 19.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-28" name="Alinknote-28">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      28 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-28">return</a>)<br/> [ Appian of Alexandria, in
      the preface to his History of the Roman Wars.]
    </p>
<p>
      The terror of the Roman arms added weight and dignity to the moderation of
      the emperors. They preserved peace by a constant preparation for war; and
      while justice regulated their conduct, they announced to the nations on
      their confines, that they were as little disposed to endure, as to offer
      an injury. The military strength, which it had been sufficient for Hadrian
      and the elder Antoninus to display, was exerted against the Parthians and
      the Germans by the emperor Marcus. The hostilities of the barbarians
      provoked the resentment of that philosophic monarch, and, in the
      prosecution of a just defence, Marcus and his generals obtained many
      signal victories, both on the Euphrates and on the Danube. <a href="#Alinknote-29" id="Alinknoteref-29" name="Alinknoteref-29">29</a> The
      military establishment of the Roman empire, which thus assured either its
      tranquillity or success, will now become the proper and important object
      of our attention.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-29" name="Alinknote-29">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      29 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-29">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion, l. lxxi. Hist.
      August. in Marco. The Parthian victories gave birth to a crowd of
      contemptible historians, whose memory has been rescued from oblivion and
      exposed to ridicule, in a very lively piece of criticism of Lucian.]
    </p>
<p>
      In the purer ages of the commonwealth, the use of arms was reserved for
      those ranks of citizens who had a country to love, a property to defend,
      and some share in enacting those laws, which it was their interest as well
      as duty to maintain. But in proportion as the public freedom was lost in
      extent of conquest, war was gradually improved into an art, and degraded
      into a trade. <a href="#Alinknote-30" id="Alinknoteref-30" name="Alinknoteref-30">30</a> The legions themselves, even at the time when
      they were recruited in the most distant provinces, were supposed to
      consist of Roman citizens. That distinction was generally considered,
      either as a legal qualification or as a proper recompense for the soldier;
      but a more serious regard was paid to the essential merit of age,
      strength, and military stature. <a href="#Alinknote-31" id="Alinknoteref-31" name="Alinknoteref-31">31</a> In all levies, a just
      preference was given to the climates of the North over those of the South:
      the race of men born to the exercise of arms was sought for in the country
      rather than in cities; and it was very reasonably presumed, that the hardy
      occupations of smiths, carpenters, and huntsmen, would supply more vigor
      and resolution than the sedentary trades which are employed in the service
      of luxury. <a href="#Alinknote-32" id="Alinknoteref-32" name="Alinknoteref-32">32</a>
      After every qualification of property had been laid aside, the armies of
      the Roman emperors were still commanded, for the most part, by officers of
      liberal birth and education; but the common soldiers, like the mercenary
      troops of modern Europe, were drawn from the meanest, and very frequently
      from the most profligate, of mankind.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-30" name="Alinknote-30">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      30 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-30">return</a>)<br/> [ The poorest rank of
      soldiers possessed above forty pounds sterling, (Dionys. Halicarn. iv.
      17,) a very high qualification at a time when money was so scarce, that an
      ounce of silver was equivalent to seventy pounds weight of brass. The
      populace, excluded by the ancient constitution, were indiscriminately
      admitted by Marius. See Sallust. de Bell. Jugurth. c. 91. * Note: On the
      uncertainty of all these estimates, and the difficulty of fixing the
      relative value of brass and silver, compare Niebuhr, vol. i. p. 473, &amp;c.
      Eng. trans. p. 452. According to Niebuhr, the relative disproportion in
      value, between the two metals, arose, in a great degree from the abundance
      of brass or copper.—M. Compare also Dureau 'de la Malle Economie
      Politique des Romains especially L. l. c. ix.—M. 1845.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-31" name="Alinknote-31">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      31 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-31">return</a>)<br/> [ Caesar formed his legion
      Alauda of Gauls and strangers; but it was during the license of civil war;
      and after the victory, he gave them the freedom of the city for their
      reward.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-32" name="Alinknote-32">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      32 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-32">return</a>)<br/> [ See Vegetius, de Re
      Militari, l. i. c. 2—7.]
    </p>
<p>
      That public virtue, which among the ancients was denominated patriotism,
      is derived from a strong sense of our own interest in the preservation and
      prosperity of the free government of which we are members. Such a
      sentiment, which had rendered the legions of the republic almost
      invincible, could make but a very feeble impression on the mercenary
      servants of a despotic prince; and it became necessary to supply that
      defect by other motives, of a different, but not less forcible nature—honor
      and religion. The peasant, or mechanic, imbibed the useful prejudice that
      he was advanced to the more dignified profession of arms, in which his
      rank and reputation would depend on his own valor; and that, although the
      prowess of a private soldier must often escape the notice of fame, his own
      behavior might sometimes confer glory or disgrace on the company, the
      legion, or even the army, to whose honors he was associated. On his first
      entrance into the service, an oath was administered to him with every
      circumstance of solemnity. He promised never to desert his standard, to
      submit his own will to the commands of his leaders, and to sacrifice his
      life for the safety of the emperor and the empire. <a href="#Alinknote-33" id="Alinknoteref-33" name="Alinknoteref-33">33</a> The attachment of the
      Roman troops to their standards was inspired by the united influence of
      religion and of honor. The golden eagle, which glittered in the front of
      the legion, was the object of their fondest devotion; nor was it esteemed
      less impious than it was ignominious, to abandon that sacred ensign in the
      hour of danger. <a href="#Alinknote-34" id="Alinknoteref-34" name="Alinknoteref-34">34</a> These motives, which derived their strength
      from the imagination, were enforced by fears and hopes of a more
      substantial kind. Regular pay, occasional donatives, and a stated
      recompense, after the appointed time of service, alleviated the hardships
      of the military life, <a href="#Alinknote-35" id="Alinknoteref-35" name="Alinknoteref-35">35</a> whilst, on the other hand, it was impossible
      for cowardice or disobedience to escape the severest punishment. The
      centurions were authorized to chastise with blows, the generals had a
      right to punish with death; and it was an inflexible maxim of Roman
      discipline, that a good soldier should dread his officers far more than
      the enemy. From such laudable arts did the valor of the Imperial troops
      receive a degree of firmness and docility unattainable by the impetuous
      and irregular passions of barbarians.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-33" name="Alinknote-33">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      33 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-33">return</a>)<br/> [ The oath of service and
      fidelity to the emperor was annually renewed by the troops on the first of
      January.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-34" name="Alinknote-34">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      34 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-34">return</a>)<br/> [ Tacitus calls the Roman
      eagles, Bellorum Deos. They were placed in a chapel in the camp, and with
      the other deities received the religious worship of the troops. * Note:
      See also Dio. Cass. xl. c. 18. —M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-35" name="Alinknote-35">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      35 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-35">return</a>)<br/> [ See Gronovius de Pecunia
      vetere, l. iii. p. 120, &amp;c. The emperor Domitian raised the annual
      stipend of the legionaries to twelve pieces of gold, which, in his time,
      was equivalent to about ten of our guineas. This pay, somewhat higher than
      our own, had been, and was afterwards, gradually increased, according to
      the progress of wealth and military government. After twenty years'
      service, the veteran received three thousand denarii, (about one hundred
      pounds sterling,) or a proportionable allowance of land. The pay and
      advantages of the guards were, in general, about double those of the
      legions.]
    </p>
<p>
      And yet so sensible were the Romans of the imperfection of valor without
      skill and practice, that, in their language, the name of an army was
      borrowed from the word which signified exercise. <a href="#Alinknote-36" id="Alinknoteref-36" name="Alinknoteref-36">36</a> Military exercises were
      the important and unremitted object of their discipline. The recruits and
      young soldiers were constantly trained, both in the morning and in the
      evening, nor was age or knowledge allowed to excuse the veterans from the
      daily repetition of what they had completely learnt. Large sheds were
      erected in the winter-quarters of the troops, that their useful labors
      might not receive any interruption from the most tempestuous weather; and
      it was carefully observed, that the arms destined to this imitation of
      war, should be of double the weight which was required in real action. <a href="#Alinknote-37" id="Alinknoteref-37" name="Alinknoteref-37">37</a> It is
      not the purpose of this work to enter into any minute description of the
      Roman exercises. We shall only remark, that they comprehended whatever
      could add strength to the body, activity to the limbs, or grace to the
      motions. The soldiers were diligently instructed to march, to run, to
      leap, to swim, to carry heavy burdens, to handle every species of arms
      that was used either for offence or for defence, either in distant
      engagement or in a closer onset; to form a variety of evolutions; and to
      move to the sound of flutes in the Pyrrhic or martial dance. <a href="#Alinknote-38" id="Alinknoteref-38" name="Alinknoteref-38">38</a> In
      the midst of peace, the Roman troops familiarized themselves with the
      practice of war; and it is prettily remarked by an ancient historian who
      had fought against them, that the effusion of blood was the only
      circumstance which distinguished a field of battle from a field of
      exercise. <a href="#Alinknote-39" id="Alinknoteref-39" name="Alinknoteref-39">39</a>
      It was the policy of the ablest generals, and even of the emperors
      themselves, to encourage these military studies by their presence and
      example; and we are informed that Hadrian, as well as Trajan, frequently
      condescended to instruct the unexperienced soldiers, to reward the
      diligent, and sometimes to dispute with them the prize of superior
      strength or dexterity. <a href="#Alinknote-40" id="Alinknoteref-40" name="Alinknoteref-40">40</a> Under the reigns of those princes, the science
      of tactics was cultivated with success; and as long as the empire retained
      any vigor, their military instructions were respected as the most perfect
      model of Roman discipline.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-36" name="Alinknote-36">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      36 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-36">return</a>)<br/> [ Exercitus ab exercitando,
      Varro de Lingua Latina, l. iv. Cicero in Tusculan. l. ii. 37. 15. There is
      room for a very interesting work, which should lay open the connection
      between the languages and manners of nations. * Note I am not aware of the
      existence, at present, of such a work; but the profound observations of
      the late William von Humboldt, in the introduction to his posthumously
      published Essay on the Language of the Island of Java, (uber die
      Kawi-sprache, Berlin, 1836,) may cause regret that this task was not
      completed by that accomplished and universal scholar.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-37" name="Alinknote-37">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      37 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-37">return</a>)<br/> [ Vegatius, l. ii. and the
      rest of his first book.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-38" name="Alinknote-38">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      38 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-38">return</a>)<br/> [ The Pyrrhic dance is
      extremely well illustrated by M. le Beau, in the Academie des
      Inscriptions, tom. xxxv. p. 262, &amp;c. That learned academician, in a
      series of memoirs, has collected all the passages of the ancients that
      relate to the Roman legion.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-39" name="Alinknote-39">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      39 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-39">return</a>)<br/> [ Joseph. de Bell. Judaico,
      l. iii. c. 5. We are indebted to this Jew for some very curious details of
      Roman discipline.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-40" name="Alinknote-40">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      40 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-40">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Panegyr. c. 13.
      Life of Hadrian, in the Augustan History.]
    </p>
<p>
      Nine centuries of war had gradually introduced into the service many
      alterations and improvements. The legions, as they are described by
      Polybius, <a href="#Alinknote-41" id="Alinknoteref-41" name="Alinknoteref-41">41</a>
      in the time of the Punic wars, differed very materially from those which
      achieved the victories of Caesar, or defended the monarchy of Hadrian and
      the Antonines.
    </p>
<p>
      The constitution of the Imperial legion may be described in a few words.
      <a href="#Alinknote-42" id="Alinknoteref-42" name="Alinknoteref-42">42</a>
      The heavy-armed infantry, which composed its principal strength, <a href="#Alinknote-43" id="Alinknoteref-43" name="Alinknoteref-43">43</a> was
      divided into ten cohorts, and fifty-five companies, under the orders of a
      correspondent number of tribunes and centurions. The first cohort, which
      always claimed the post of honor and the custody of the eagle, was formed
      of eleven hundred and five soldiers, the most approved for valor and
      fidelity. The remaining nine cohorts consisted each of five hundred and
      fifty-five; and the whole body of legionary infantry amounted to six
      thousand one hundred men. Their arms were uniform, and admirably adapted
      to the nature of their service: an open helmet, with a lofty crest; a
      breastplate, or coat of mail; greaves on their legs, and an ample buckler
      on their left arm. The buckler was of an oblong and concave figure, four
      feet in length, and two and a half in breadth, framed of a light wood,
      covered with a bull's hide, and strongly guarded with plates of brass.
      Besides a lighter spear, the legionary soldier grasped in his right hand
      the formidable pilum, a ponderous javelin, whose utmost length was about
      six feet, and which was terminated by a massy triangular point of steel of
      eighteen inches. <a href="#Alinknote-44" id="Alinknoteref-44" name="Alinknoteref-44">44</a> This instrument was indeed much inferior to our
      modern fire-arms; since it was exhausted by a single discharge, at the
      distance of only ten or twelve paces. Yet when it was launched by a firm
      and skilful hand, there was not any cavalry that durst venture within its
      reach, nor any shield or corselet that could sustain the impetuosity of
      its weight. As soon as the Roman had darted his pilum, he drew his sword,
      and rushed forwards to close with the enemy. His sword was a short
      well-tempered Spanish blade, that carried a double edge, and was alike
      suited to the purpose of striking or of pushing; but the soldier was
      always instructed to prefer the latter use of his weapon, as his own body
      remained less exposed, whilst he inflicted a more dangerous wound on his
      adversary. <a href="#Alinknote-45" id="Alinknoteref-45" name="Alinknoteref-45">45</a>
      The legion was usually drawn up eight deep; and the regular distance of
      three feet was left between the files as well as ranks. <a href="#Alinknote-46" id="Alinknoteref-46" name="Alinknoteref-46">46</a> A
      body of troops, habituated to preserve this open order, in a long front
      and a rapid charge, found themselves prepared to execute every disposition
      which the circumstances of war, or the skill of their leader, might
      suggest. The soldier possessed a free space for his arms and motions, and
      sufficient intervals were allowed, through which seasonable reenforcements
      might be introduced to the relief of the exhausted combatants. <a href="#Alinknote-47" id="Alinknoteref-47" name="Alinknoteref-47">47</a> The
      tactics of the Greeks and Macedonians were formed on very different
      principles. The strength of the phalanx depended on sixteen ranks of long
      pikes, wedged together in the closest array. <a href="#Alinknote-48" id="Alinknoteref-48" name="Alinknoteref-48">48</a> But it was soon
      discovered by reflection, as well as by the event, that the strength of
      the phalanx was unable to contend with the activity of the legion. <a href="#Alinknote-49" id="Alinknoteref-49" name="Alinknoteref-49">49</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-41" name="Alinknote-41">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      41 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-41">return</a>)<br/> [ See an admirable
      digression on the Roman discipline, in the sixth book of his History.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-42" name="Alinknote-42">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      42 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-42">return</a>)<br/> [ Vegetius de Re Militari,
      l. ii. c. 4, &amp;c. Considerable part of his very perplexed abridgment
      was taken from the regulations of Trajan and Hadrian; and the legion, as
      he describes it, cannot suit any other age of the Roman empire.] <a id="Alinknote-43" name="Alinknote-43">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      43 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-43">return</a>)<br/> [Vegetius de Re Militari,
      l. ii. c. 1. In the purer age of Caesar and Cicero, the word miles was
      almost confined to the infantry. Under the lower empire, and the times of
      chivalry, it was appropriated almost as exclusively to the men at arms,
      who fought on horseback.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-44" name="Alinknote-44">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      44 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-44">return</a>)<br/> [ In the time of Polybius
      and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, (l. v. c. 45,) the steel point of the
      pilum seems to have been much longer. In the time of Vegetius, it was
      reduced to a foot, or even nine inches. I have chosen a medium.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-45" name="Alinknote-45">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      45 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-45">return</a>)<br/> [ For the legionary arms,
      see Lipsius de Militia Romana, l. iii. c. 2—7.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-46" name="Alinknote-46">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      46 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-46">return</a>)<br/> [ See the beautiful
      comparison of Virgil, Georgic ii. v. 279.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-47" name="Alinknote-47">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      47 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-47">return</a>)<br/> [ M. Guichard, Memoires
      Militaires, tom. i. c. 4, and Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 293—311,
      has treated the subject like a scholar and an officer.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-48" name="Alinknote-48">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      48 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-48">return</a>)<br/> [ See Arrian's Tactics.
      With the true partiality of a Greek, Arrian rather chose to describe the
      phalanx, of which he had read, than the legions which he had commanded.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-49" name="Alinknote-49">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      49 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-49">return</a>)<br/> [ Polyb. l. xvii. (xviii.
      9.)]
    </p>
<p>
      The cavalry, without which the force of the legion would have remained
      imperfect, was divided into ten troops or squadrons; the first, as the
      companion of the first cohort, consisted of a hundred and thirty-two men;
      whilst each of the other nine amounted only to sixty-six. The entire
      establishment formed a regiment, if we may use the modern expression, of
      seven hundred and twenty-six horse, naturally connected with its
      respective legion, but occasionally separated to act in the line, and to
      compose a part of the wings of the army. <a href="#Alinknote-50" id="Alinknoteref-50" name="Alinknoteref-50">50</a> The cavalry of the
      emperors was no longer composed, like that of the ancient republic, of the
      noblest youths of Rome and Italy, who, by performing their military
      service on horseback, prepared themselves for the offices of senator and
      consul; and solicited, by deeds of valor, the future suffrages of their
      countrymen. <a href="#Alinknote-51" id="Alinknoteref-51" name="Alinknoteref-51">51</a> Since the alteration of manners and government,
      the most wealthy of the equestrian order were engaged in the
      administration of justice, and of the revenue; <a href="#Alinknote-52" id="Alinknoteref-52" name="Alinknoteref-52">52</a> and whenever they
      embraced the profession of arms, they were immediately intrusted with a
      troop of horse, or a cohort of foot. <a href="#Alinknote-53" id="Alinknoteref-53" name="Alinknoteref-53">53</a> Trajan and Hadrian formed
      their cavalry from the same provinces, and the same class of their
      subjects, which recruited the ranks of the legion. The horses were bred,
      for the most part, in Spain or Cappadocia. The Roman troopers despised the
      complete armor with which the cavalry of the East was encumbered. Their
      more useful arms consisted in a helmet, an oblong shield, light boots, and
      a coat of mail. A javelin, and a long broad sword, were their principal
      weapons of offence. The use of lances and of iron maces they seem to have
      borrowed from the barbarians. <a href="#Alinknote-54" id="Alinknoteref-54" name="Alinknoteref-54">54</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-50" name="Alinknote-50">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      50 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-50">return</a>)<br/> [ Veget. de Re Militari, l.
      ii. c. 6. His positive testimony, which might be supported by
      circumstantial evidence, ought surely to silence those critics who refuse
      the Imperial legion its proper body of cavalry. Note: See also Joseph. B.
      J. iii. vi. 2.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-51" name="Alinknote-51">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      51 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-51">return</a>)<br/> [ See Livy almost
      throughout, particularly xlii. 61.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-52" name="Alinknote-52">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      52 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-52">return</a>)<br/> [ Plin. Hist. Natur.
      xxxiii. 2. The true sense of that very curious passage was first
      discovered and illustrated by M. de Beaufort, Republique Romaine, l. ii.
      c. 2.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-53" name="Alinknote-53">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      53 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-53">return</a>)<br/> [ As in the instance of
      Horace and Agricola. This appears to have been a defect in the Roman
      discipline; which Hadrian endeavored to remedy by ascertaining the legal
      age of a tribune. * Note: These details are not altogether accurate.
      Although, in the latter days of the republic, and under the first
      emperors, the young Roman nobles obtained the command of a squadron or a
      cohort with greater facility than in the former times, they never obtained
      it without passing through a tolerably long military service. Usually they
      served first in the praetorian cohort, which was intrusted with the guard
      of the general: they were received into the companionship (contubernium)
      of some superior officer, and were there formed for duty. Thus Julius
      Caesar, though sprung from a great family, served first as contubernalis
      under the praetor, M. Thermus, and later under Servilius the Isaurian.
      (Suet. Jul. 2, 5. Plut. in Par. p. 516. Ed. Froben.) The example of
      Horace, which Gibbon adduces to prove that young knights were made
      tribunes immediately on entering the service, proves nothing. In the first
      place, Horace was not a knight; he was the son of a freedman of Venusia,
      in Apulia, who exercised the humble office of coactor exauctionum,
      (collector of payments at auctions.) (Sat. i. vi. 45, or 86.) Moreover,
      when the poet was made tribune, Brutus, whose army was nearly entirely
      composed of Orientals, gave this title to all the Romans of consideration
      who joined him. The emperors were still less difficult in their choice;
      the number of tribunes was augmented; the title and honors were conferred
      on persons whom they wished to attack to the court. Augustus conferred on
      the sons of senators, sometimes the tribunate, sometimes the command of a
      squadron. Claudius gave to the knights who entered into the service, first
      the command of a cohort of auxiliaries, later that of a squadron, and at
      length, for the first time, the tribunate. (Suet in Claud. with the notes
      of Ernesti.) The abuses that arose caused by the edict of Hadrian, which
      fixed the age at which that honor could be attained. (Spart. in Had. &amp;c.)
      This edict was subsequently obeyed; for the emperor Valerian, in a letter
      addressed to Mulvius Gallinnus, praetorian praefect, excuses himself for
      having violated it in favor of the young Probus afterwards emperor, on
      whom he had conferred the tribunate at an earlier age on account of his
      rare talents. (Vopisc. in Prob. iv.)—W. and G. Agricola, though
      already invested with the title of tribune, was contubernalis in Britain
      with Suetonius Paulinus. Tac. Agr. v.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-54" name="Alinknote-54">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      54 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-54">return</a>)<br/> [ See Arrian's Tactics.]
    </p>
<p>
      The safety and honor of the empire was principally intrusted to the
      legions, but the policy of Rome condescended to adopt every useful
      instrument of war. Considerable levies were regularly made among the
      provincials, who had not yet deserved the honorable distinction of Romans.
      Many dependent princes and communities, dispersed round the frontiers,
      were permitted, for a while, to hold their freedom and security by the
      tenure of military service. <a href="#Alinknote-55" id="Alinknoteref-55" name="Alinknoteref-55">55</a> Even select troops of hostile barbarians were
      frequently compelled or persuaded to consume their dangerous valor in
      remote climates, and for the benefit of the state. <a href="#Alinknote-56" id="Alinknoteref-56" name="Alinknoteref-56">56</a> All these were included
      under the general name of auxiliaries; and howsoever they might vary
      according to the difference of times and circumstances, their numbers were
      seldom much inferior to those of the legions themselves. <a href="#Alinknote-57" id="Alinknoteref-57" name="Alinknoteref-57">57</a> Among
      the auxiliaries, the bravest and most faithful bands were placed under the
      command of praefects and centurions, and severely trained in the arts of
      Roman discipline; but the far greater part retained those arms, to which
      the nature of their country, or their early habits of life, more
      peculiarly adapted them. By this institution, each legion, to whom a
      certain proportion of auxiliaries was allotted, contained within itself
      every species of lighter troops, and of missile weapons; and was capable
      of encountering every nation, with the advantages of its respective arms
      and discipline. <a href="#Alinknote-58" id="Alinknoteref-58" name="Alinknoteref-58">58</a> Nor was the legion destitute of what, in modern
      language, would be styled a train of artillery. It consisted in ten
      military engines of the largest, and fifty-five of a smaller size; but all
      of which, either in an oblique or horizontal manner, discharged stones and
      darts with irresistible violence. <a href="#Alinknote-59" id="Alinknoteref-59" name="Alinknoteref-59">59</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-55" name="Alinknote-55">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      55 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-55">return</a>)<br/> [ Such, in particular, was
      the state of the Batavians. Tacit. Germania, c. 29.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-56" name="Alinknote-56">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      56 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-56">return</a>)<br/> [ Marcus Antoninus obliged
      the vanquished Quadi and Marcomanni to supply him with a large body of
      troops, which he immediately sent into Britain. Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. (c.
      16.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-57" name="Alinknote-57">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      57 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-57">return</a>)<br/> [ Tacit. Annal. iv. 5.
      Those who fix a regular proportion of as many foot, and twice as many
      horse, confound the auxiliaries of the emperors with the Italian allies of
      the republic.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-58" name="Alinknote-58">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      58 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-58">return</a>)<br/> [ Vegetius, ii. 2. Arrian,
      in his order of march and battle against the Alani.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-59" name="Alinknote-59">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      59 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-59">return</a>)<br/> [ The subject of the
      ancient machines is treated with great knowledge and ingenuity by the
      Chevalier Folard, (Polybe, tom. ii. p. 233-290.) He prefers them in many
      respects to our modern cannon and mortars. We may observe, that the use of
      them in the field gradually became more prevalent, in proportion as
      personal valor and military skill declined with the Roman empire. When men
      were no longer found, their place was supplied by machines. See Vegetius,
      ii. 25. Arrian.]
    </p>
<p>
      The camp of a Roman legion presented the appearance of a fortified city.
      <a href="#Alinknote-60" id="Alinknoteref-60" name="Alinknoteref-60">60</a> As
      soon as the space was marked out, the pioneers carefully levelled the
      ground, and removed every impediment that might interrupt its perfect
      regularity. Its form was an exact quadrangle; and we may calculate, that a
      square of about seven hundred yards was sufficient for the encampment of
      twenty thousand Romans; though a similar number of our own troops would
      expose to the enemy a front of more than treble that extent. In the midst
      of the camp, the praetorium, or general's quarters, rose above the others;
      the cavalry, the infantry, and the auxiliaries occupied their respective
      stations; the streets were broad and perfectly straight, and a vacant
      space of two hundred feet was left on all sides between the tents and the
      rampart. The rampart itself was usually twelve feet high, armed with a
      line of strong and intricate palisades, and defended by a ditch of twelve
      feet in depth as well as in breadth. This important labor was performed by
      the hands of the legionaries themselves; to whom the use of the spade and
      the pickaxe was no less familiar than that of the sword or pilum. Active
      valor may often be the present of nature; but such patient diligence can
      be the fruit only of habit and discipline. <a href="#Alinknote-61" id="Alinknoteref-61" name="Alinknoteref-61">61</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-60" name="Alinknote-60">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      60 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-60">return</a>)<br/> [ Vegetius finishes his
      second book, and the description of the legion, with the following
      emphatic words:—"Universa quae in quoque belli genere necessaria
      esse creduntur, secum legio debet ubique portare, ut in quovis loco
      fixerit castra, armatam faciat civitatem."]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-61" name="Alinknote-61">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      61 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-61">return</a>)<br/> [ For the Roman
      Castrametation, see Polybius, l. vi. with Lipsius de Militia Romana,
      Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. iii. c. 5. Vegetius, i. 21—25, iii. 9, and
      Memoires de Guichard, tom. i. c. 1.]
    </p>
<p>
      Whenever the trumpet gave the signal of departure, the camp was almost
      instantly broke up, and the troops fell into their ranks without delay or
      confusion. Besides their arms, which the legendaries scarcely considered
      as an encumbrance, they were laden with their kitchen furniture, the
      instruments of fortification, and the provision of many days. <a href="#Alinknote-62" id="Alinknoteref-62" name="Alinknoteref-62">62</a> Under
      this weight, which would oppress the delicacy of a modern soldier, they
      were trained by a regular step to advance, in about six hours, near twenty
      miles. <a href="#Alinknote-63" id="Alinknoteref-63" name="Alinknoteref-63">63</a>
      On the appearance of an enemy, they threw aside their baggage, and by easy
      and rapid evolutions converted the column of march into an order of
      battle. <a href="#Alinknote-64" id="Alinknoteref-64" name="Alinknoteref-64">64</a>
      The slingers and archers skirmished in the front; the auxiliaries formed
      the first line, and were seconded or sustained by the strength of the
      legions; the cavalry covered the flanks, and the military engines were
      placed in the rear.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-62" name="Alinknote-62">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      62 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-62">return</a>)<br/> [ Cicero in Tusculan. ii.
      37, [15.]—Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. iii. 5, Frontinus, iv. 1.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-63" name="Alinknote-63">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      63 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-63">return</a>)<br/> [ Vegetius, i. 9. See
      Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxv. p. 187.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-64" name="Alinknote-64">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      64 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-64">return</a>)<br/> [ See those evolutions
      admirably well explained by M. Guichard Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 141—234.]
    </p>
<p>
      Such were the arts of war, by which the Roman emperors defended their
      extensive conquests, and preserved a military spirit, at a time when every
      other virtue was oppressed by luxury and despotism. If, in the
      consideration of their armies, we pass from their discipline to their
      numbers, we shall not find it easy to define them with any tolerable
      accuracy. We may compute, however, that the legion, which was itself a
      body of six thousand eight hundred and thirty-one Romans, might, with its
      attendant auxiliaries, amount to about twelve thousand five hundred men.
      The peace establishment of Hadrian and his successors was composed of no
      less than thirty of these formidable brigades; and most probably formed a
      standing force of three hundred and seventy-five thousand men. Instead of
      being confined within the walls of fortified cities, which the Romans
      considered as the refuge of weakness or pusillanimity, the legions were
      encamped on the banks of the great rivers, and along the frontiers of the
      barbarians. As their stations, for the most part, remained fixed and
      permanent, we may venture to describe the distribution of the troops.
      Three legions were sufficient for Britain. The principal strength lay upon
      the Rhine and Danube, and consisted of sixteen legions, in the following
      proportions: two in the Lower, and three in the Upper Germany; one in
      Rhaetia, one in Noricum, four in Pannonia, three in Maesia, and two in
      Dacia. The defence of the Euphrates was intrusted to eight legions, six of
      whom were planted in Syria, and the other two in Cappadocia. With regard
      to Egypt, Africa, and Spain, as they were far removed from any important
      scene of war, a single legion maintained the domestic tranquillity of each
      of those great provinces. Even Italy was not left destitute of a military
      force. Above twenty thousand chosen soldiers, distinguished by the titles
      of City Cohorts and Praetorian Guards, watched over the safety of the
      monarch and the capital. As the authors of almost every revolution that
      distracted the empire, the Praetorians will, very soon, and very loudly,
      demand our attention; but, in their arms and institutions, we cannot find
      any circumstance which discriminated them from the legions, unless it were
      a more splendid appearance, and a less rigid discipline. <a href="#Alinknote-65" id="Alinknoteref-65" name="Alinknoteref-65">65</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-65" name="Alinknote-65">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      65 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-65">return</a>)<br/> [ Tacitus (Annal. iv. 5)
      has given us a state of the legions under Tiberius; and Dion Cassius (l.
      lv. p. 794) under Alexander Severus. I have endeavored to fix on the
      proper medium between these two periods. See likewise Lipsius de
      Magnitudine Romana, l. i. c. 4, 5.]
    </p>
<p>
      The navy maintained by the emperors might seem inadequate to their
      greatness; but it was fully sufficient for every useful purpose of
      government. The ambition of the Romans was confined to the land; nor was
      that warlike people ever actuated by the enterprising spirit which had
      prompted the navigators of Tyre, of Carthage, and even of Marseilles, to
      enlarge the bounds of the world, and to explore the most remote coasts of
      the ocean. To the Romans the ocean remained an object of terror rather
      than of curiosity; <a href="#Alinknote-66" id="Alinknoteref-66" name="Alinknoteref-66">66</a> the whole extent of the Mediterranean, after
      the destruction of Carthage, and the extirpation of the pirates, was
      included within their provinces. The policy of the emperors was directed
      only to preserve the peaceful dominion of that sea, and to protect the
      commerce of their subjects. With these moderate views, Augustus stationed
      two permanent fleets in the most convenient ports of Italy, the one at
      Ravenna, on the Adriatic, the other at Misenum, in the Bay of Naples.
      Experience seems at length to have convinced the ancients, that as soon as
      their galleys exceeded two, or at the most three ranks of oars, they were
      suited rather for vain pomp than for real service. Augustus himself, in
      the victory of Actium, had seen the superiority of his own light frigates
      (they were called Liburnians) over the lofty but unwieldy castles of his
      rival. <a href="#Alinknote-67" id="Alinknoteref-67" name="Alinknoteref-67">67</a>
      Of these Liburnians he composed the two fleets of Ravenna and Misenum,
      destined to command, the one the eastern, the other the western division
      of the Mediterranean; and to each of the squadrons he attached a body of
      several thousand marines. Besides these two ports, which may be considered
      as the principal seats of the Roman navy, a very considerable force was
      stationed at Frejus, on the coast of Provence, and the Euxine was guarded
      by forty ships, and three thousand soldiers. To all these we add the fleet
      which preserved the communication between Gaul and Britain, and a great
      number of vessels constantly maintained on the Rhine and Danube, to harass
      the country, or to intercept the passage of the barbarians. <a href="#Alinknote-68" id="Alinknoteref-68" name="Alinknoteref-68">68</a> If we
      review this general state of the Imperial forces; of the cavalry as well
      as infantry; of the legions, the auxiliaries, the guards, and the navy;
      the most liberal computation will not allow us to fix the entire
      establishment by sea and by land at more than four hundred and fifty
      thousand men: a military power, which, however formidable it may seem, was
      equalled by a monarch of the last century, whose kingdom was confined
      within a single province of the Roman empire. <a href="#Alinknote-69" id="Alinknoteref-69" name="Alinknoteref-69">69</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-66" name="Alinknote-66">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      66 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-66">return</a>)<br/> [ The Romans tried to
      disguise, by the pretence of religious awe their ignorance and terror. See
      Tacit. Germania, c. 34.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-67" name="Alinknote-67">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      67 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-67">return</a>)<br/> [ Plutarch, in Marc. Anton.
      [c. 67.] And yet, if we may credit Orosius, these monstrous castles were
      no more than ten feet above the water, vi. 19.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-68" name="Alinknote-68">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      68 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-68">return</a>)<br/> [ See Lipsius, de Magnitud.
      Rom. l. i. c. 5. The sixteen last chapters of Vegetius relate to naval
      affairs.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-69" name="Alinknote-69">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      69 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-69">return</a>)<br/> [ Voltaire, Siecle de Louis
      XIV. c. 29. It must, however, be remembered, that France still feels that
      extraordinary effort.]
    </p>
<p>
      We have attempted to explain the spirit which moderated, and the strength
      which supported, the power of Hadrian and the Antonines. We shall now
      endeavor, with clearness and precision, to describe the provinces once
      united under their sway, but, at present, divided into so many independent
      and hostile states. Spain, the western extremity of the empire, of Europe,
      and of the ancient world, has, in every age, invariably preserved the same
      natural limits; the Pyrenaean Mountains, the Mediterranean, and the
      Atlantic Ocean. That great peninsula, at present so unequally divided
      between two sovereigns, was distributed by Augustus into three provinces,
      Lusitania, Baetica, and Tarraconensis. The kingdom of Portugal now fills
      the place of the warlike country of the Lusitanians; and the loss
      sustained by the former on the side of the East, is compensated by an
      accession of territory towards the North. The confines of Grenada and
      Andalusia correspond with those of ancient Baetica. The remainder of
      Spain, Gallicia, and the Asturias, Biscay, and Navarre, Leon, and the two
      Castiles, Murcia, Valencia, Catalonia, and Arragon, all contributed to
      form the third and most considerable of the Roman governments, which, from
      the name of its capital, was styled the province of Tarragona. <a href="#Alinknote-70" id="Alinknoteref-70" name="Alinknoteref-70">70</a> Of
      the native barbarians, the Celtiberians were the most powerful, as the
      Cantabrians and Asturians proved the most obstinate. Confident in the
      strength of their mountains, they were the last who submitted to the arms
      of Rome, and the first who threw off the yoke of the Arabs.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-70" name="Alinknote-70">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      70 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-70">return</a>)<br/> [ See Strabo, l. ii. It is
      natural enough to suppose, that Arragon is derived from Tarraconensis, and
      several moderns who have written in Latin use those words as synonymous.
      It is, however, certain, that the Arragon, a little stream which falls
      from the Pyrenees into the Ebro, first gave its name to a country, and
      gradually to a kingdom. See d'Anville, Geographie du Moyen Age, p. 181.]
    </p>
<p>
      Ancient Gaul, as it contained the whole country between the Pyrenees, the
      Alps, the Rhine, and the Ocean, was of greater extent than modern France.
      To the dominions of that powerful monarchy, with its recent acquisitions
      of Alsace and Lorraine, we must add the duchy of Savoy, the cantons of
      Switzerland, the four electorates of the Rhine, and the territories of
      Liege, Luxemburgh, Hainault, Flanders, and Brabant. When Augustus gave
      laws to the conquests of his father, he introduced a division of Gaul,
      equally adapted to the progress of the legions, to the course of the
      rivers, and to the principal national distinctions, which had comprehended
      above a hundred independent states. <a href="#Alinknote-71" id="Alinknoteref-71" name="Alinknoteref-71">71</a> The sea-coast of the
      Mediterranean, Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphine, received their
      provincial appellation from the colony of Narbonne. The government of
      Aquitaine was extended from the Pyrenees to the Loire. The country between
      the Loire and the Seine was styled the Celtic Gaul, and soon borrowed a
      new denomination from the celebrated colony of Lugdunum, or Lyons. The
      Belgic lay beyond the Seine, and in more ancient times had been bounded
      only by the Rhine; but a little before the age of Caesar, the Germans,
      abusing their superiority of valor, had occupied a considerable portion of
      the Belgic territory. The Roman conquerors very eagerly embraced so
      flattering a circumstance, and the Gallic frontier of the Rhine, from
      Basil to Leyden, received the pompous names of the Upper and the Lower
      Germany. <a href="#Alinknote-72" id="Alinknoteref-72" name="Alinknoteref-72">72</a>
      Such, under the reign of the Antonines, were the six provinces of Gaul;
      the Narbonnese, Aquitaine, the Celtic, or Lyonnese, the Belgic, and the
      two Germanies.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-71" name="Alinknote-71">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      71 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-71">return</a>)<br/> [ One hundred and fifteen
      cities appear in the Notitia of Gaul; and it is well known that this
      appellation was applied not only to the capital town, but to the whole
      territory of each state. But Plutarch and Appian increase the number of
      tribes to three or four hundred.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-72" name="Alinknote-72">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      72 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-72">return</a>)<br/> [ D'Anville. Notice de
      l'Ancienne Gaule.]
    </p>
<p>
      We have already had occasion to mention the conquest of Britain, and to
      fix the boundary of the Roman Province in this island. It comprehended all
      England, Wales, and the Lowlands of Scotland, as far as the Friths of
      Dumbarton and Edinburgh. Before Britain lost her freedom, the country was
      irregularly divided between thirty tribes of barbarians, of whom the most
      considerable were the Belgae in the West, the Brigantes in the North, the
      Silures in South Wales, and the Iceni in Norfolk and Suffolk. <a href="#Alinknote-73" id="Alinknoteref-73" name="Alinknoteref-73">73</a> As
      far as we can either trace or credit the resemblance of manners and
      language, Spain, Gaul, and Britain were peopled by the same hardy race of
      savages. Before they yielded to the Roman arms, they often disputed the
      field, and often renewed the contest. After their submission, they
      constituted the western division of the European provinces, which extended
      from the columns of Hercules to the wall of Antoninus, and from the mouth
      of the Tagus to the sources of the Rhine and Danube.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-73" name="Alinknote-73">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      73 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-73">return</a>)<br/> [ Whittaker's History of
      Manchester, vol. i. c. 3.] Before the Roman conquest, the country which is
      now called Lombardy, was not considered as a part of Italy. It had been
      occupied by a powerful colony of Gauls, who, settling themselves along the
      banks of the Po, from Piedmont to Romagna, carried their arms and diffused
      their name from the Alps to the Apennine.
    </p>
<p>
      The Ligurians dwelt on the rocky coast which now forms the republic of
      Genoa. Venice was yet unborn; but the territories of that state, which lie
      to the east of the Adige, were inhabited by the Venetians. <a href="#Alinknote-74" id="Alinknoteref-74" name="Alinknoteref-74">74</a> The
      middle part of the peninsula, that now composes the duchy of Tuscany and
      the ecclesiastical state, was the ancient seat of the Etruscans and
      Umbrians; to the former of whom Italy was indebted for the first rudiments
      of civilized life. <a href="#Alinknote-75" id="Alinknoteref-75" name="Alinknoteref-75">75</a> The Tyber rolled at the foot of the seven hills
      of Rome, and the country of the Sabines, the Latins, and the Volsci, from
      that river to the frontiers of Naples, was the theatre of her infant
      victories. On that celebrated ground the first consuls deserved triumphs,
      their successors adorned villas, and their posterity have erected
      convents. <a href="#Alinknote-76" id="Alinknoteref-76" name="Alinknoteref-76">76</a>
      Capua and Campania possessed the immediate territory of Naples; the rest
      of the kingdom was inhabited by many warlike nations, the Marsi, the
      Samnites, the Apulians, and the Lucanians; and the sea-coasts had been
      covered by the flourishing colonies of the Greeks. We may remark, that
      when Augustus divided Italy into eleven regions, the little province of
      Istria was annexed to that seat of Roman sovereignty. <a href="#Alinknote-77" id="Alinknoteref-77" name="Alinknoteref-77">77</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-74" name="Alinknote-74">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      74 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-74">return</a>)<br/> [ The Italian Veneti,
      though often confounded with the Gauls, were more probably of Illyrian
      origin. See M. Freret, Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom.
      xviii. * Note: Or Liburnian, according to Niebuhr. Vol. i. p. 172.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-75" name="Alinknote-75">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      75 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-75">return</a>)<br/> [ See Maffei Verona
      illustrata, l. i. * Note: Add Niebuhr, vol. i., and Otfried Muller, die
      Etrusker, which contains much that is known, and much that is conjectured,
      about this remarkable people. Also Micali, Storia degli antichi popoli
      Italiani. Florence, 1832—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-76" name="Alinknote-76">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      76 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-76">return</a>)<br/> [ The first contrast was
      observed by the ancients. See Florus, i. 11. The second must strike every
      modern traveller.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-77" name="Alinknote-77">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      77 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-77">return</a>)<br/> [ Pliny (Hist. Natur. l.
      iii.) follows the division of Italy by Augustus.]
    </p>
<p>
      The European provinces of Rome were protected by the course of the Rhine
      and the Danube. The latter of those mighty streams, which rises at the
      distance of only thirty miles from the former, flows above thirteen
      hundred miles, for the most part to the south-east, collects the tribute
      of sixty navigable rivers, and is, at length, through six mouths, received
      into the Euxine, which appears scarcely equal to such an accession of
      waters. <a href="#Alinknote-78" id="Alinknoteref-78" name="Alinknoteref-78">78</a>
      The provinces of the Danube soon acquired the general appellation of
      Illyricum, or the Illyrian frontier, <a href="#Alinknote-79" id="Alinknoteref-79" name="Alinknoteref-79">79</a> and were esteemed the
      most warlike of the empire; but they deserve to be more particularly
      considered under the names of Rhaetia, Noricum, Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia,
      Maesia, Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-78" name="Alinknote-78">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      78 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-78">return</a>)<br/> [ Tournefort, Voyages en
      Grece et Asie Mineure, lettre xviii.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-79" name="Alinknote-79">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      79 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-79">return</a>)<br/> [ The name of Illyricum
      originally belonged to the sea-coast of the Adriatic, and was gradually
      extended by the Romans from the Alps to the Euxine Sea. See Severini
      Pannonia, l. i. c. 3.]
    </p>
<p>
      The province of Rhaetia, which soon extinguished the name of the
      Vindelicians, extended from the summit of the Alps to the banks of the
      Danube; from its source, as far as its conflux with the Inn. The greatest
      part of the flat country is subject to the elector of Bavaria; the city of
      Augsburg is protected by the constitution of the German empire; the
      Grisons are safe in their mountains, and the country of Tirol is ranked
      among the numerous provinces of the house of Austria.
    </p>
<p>
      The wide extent of territory which is included between the Inn, the
      Danube, and the Save,—Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, the
      Lower Hungary, and Sclavonia,—was known to the ancients under the
      names of Noricum and Pannonia. In their original state of independence,
      their fierce inhabitants were intimately connected. Under the Roman
      government they were frequently united, and they still remain the
      patrimony of a single family. They now contain the residence of a German
      prince, who styles himself Emperor of the Romans, and form the centre, as
      well as strength, of the Austrian power. It may not be improper to
      observe, that if we except Bohemia, Moravia, the northern skirts of
      Austria, and a part of Hungary between the Teyss and the Danube, all the
      other dominions of the House of Austria were comprised within the limits
      of the Roman Empire.
    </p>
<p>
      Dalmatia, to which the name of Illyricum more properly belonged, was a
      long, but narrow tract, between the Save and the Adriatic. The best part
      of the sea-coast, which still retains its ancient appellation, is a
      province of the Venetian state, and the seat of the little republic of
      Ragusa. The inland parts have assumed the Sclavonian names of Croatia and
      Bosnia; the former obeys an Austrian governor, the latter a Turkish pacha;
      but the whole country is still infested by tribes of barbarians, whose
      savage independence irregularly marks the doubtful limit of the Christian
      and Mahometan power. <a href="#Alinknote-80" id="Alinknoteref-80" name="Alinknoteref-80">80</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-80" name="Alinknote-80">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      80 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-80">return</a>)<br/> [ A Venetian traveller, the
      Abbate Fortis, has lately given us some account of those very obscure
      countries. But the geography and antiquities of the western Illyricum can
      be expected only from the munificence of the emperor, its sovereign.]
    </p>
<p>
      After the Danube had received the waters of the Teyss and the Save, it
      acquired, at least among the Greeks, the name of Ister. <a href="#Alinknote-81" id="Alinknoteref-81" name="Alinknoteref-81">81</a> It
      formerly divided Maesia and Dacia, the latter of which, as we have already
      seen, was a conquest of Trajan, and the only province beyond the river. If
      we inquire into the present state of those countries, we shall find that,
      on the left hand of the Danube, Temeswar and Transylvania have been
      annexed, after many revolutions, to the crown of Hungary; whilst the
      principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia acknowledge the supremacy of the
      Ottoman Porte. On the right hand of the Danube, Maesia, which, during the
      middle ages, was broken into the barbarian kingdoms of Servia and
      Bulgaria, is again united in Turkish slavery.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-81" name="Alinknote-81">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      81 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-81">return</a>)<br/> [ The Save rises near the
      confines of Istria, and was considered by the more early Greeks as the
      principal stream of the Danube.]
    </p>
<p>
      The appellation of Roumelia, which is still bestowed by the Turks on the
      extensive countries of Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece, preserves the memory
      of their ancient state under the Roman empire. In the time of the
      Antonines, the martial regions of Thrace, from the mountains of Haemus and
      Rhodope, to the Bosphorus and the Hellespont, had assumed the form of a
      province. Notwithstanding the change of masters and of religion, the new
      city of Rome, founded by Constantine on the banks of the Bosphorus, has
      ever since remained the capital of a great monarchy. The kingdom of
      Macedonia, which, under the reign of Alexander, gave laws to Asia, derived
      more solid advantages from the policy of the two Philips; and with its
      dependencies of Epirus and Thessaly, extended from the Aegean to the
      Ionian Sea. When we reflect on the fame of Thebes and Argos, of Sparta and
      Athens, we can scarcely persuade ourselves, that so many immortal
      republics of ancient Greece were lost in a single province of the Roman
      empire, which, from the superior influence of the Achaean league, was
      usually denominated the province of Achaia.
    </p>
<p>
      Such was the state of Europe under the Roman emperors. The provinces of
      Asia, without excepting the transient conquests of Trajan, are all
      comprehended within the limits of the Turkish power. But, instead of
      following the arbitrary divisions of despotism and ignorance, it will be
      safer for us, as well as more agreeable, to observe the indelible
      characters of nature. The name of Asia Minor is attributed with some
      propriety to the peninsula, which, confined betwixt the Euxine and the
      Mediterranean, advances from the Euphrates towards Europe. The most
      extensive and flourishing district, westward of Mount Taurus and the River
      Halys, was dignified by the Romans with the exclusive title of Asia. The
      jurisdiction of that province extended over the ancient monarchies of
      Troy, Lydia, and Phrygia, the maritime countries of the Pamphylians,
      Lycians, and Carians, and the Grecian colonies of Ionia, which equalled in
      arts, though not in arms, the glory of their parent. The kingdoms of
      Bithynia and Pontus possessed the northern side of the peninsula from
      Constantinople to Trebizond. On the opposite side, the province of Cilicia
      was terminated by the mountains of Syria: the inland country, separated
      from the Roman Asia by the River Halys, and from Armenia by the Euphrates,
      had once formed the independent kingdom of Cappadocia. In this place we
      may observe, that the northern shores of the Euxine, beyond Trebizond in
      Asia, and beyond the Danube in Europe, acknowledged the sovereignty of the
      emperors, and received at their hands either tributary princes or Roman
      garrisons. Budzak, Crim Tartary, Circassia, and Mingrelia, are the modern
      appellations of those savage countries. <a href="#Alinknote-82" id="Alinknoteref-82" name="Alinknoteref-82">82</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-82" name="Alinknote-82">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      82 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-82">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Periplus of
      Arrian. He examined the coasts of the Euxine, when he was governor of
      Cappadocia.]
    </p>
<p>
      Under the successors of Alexander, Syria was the seat of the Seleucidae,
      who reigned over Upper Asia, till the successful revolt of the Parthians
      confined their dominions between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean. When
      Syria became subject to the Romans, it formed the eastern frontier of
      their empire: nor did that province, in its utmost latitude, know any
      other bounds than the mountains of Cappadocia to the north, and towards
      the south, the confines of Egypt, and the Red Sea. Phoenicia and Palestine
      were sometimes annexed to, and sometimes separated from, the jurisdiction
      of Syria. The former of these was a narrow and rocky coast; the latter was
      a territory scarcely superior to Wales, either in fertility or extent. <a href="#Alinknote-821" id="Alinknoteref-821" name="Alinknoteref-821">821</a>
      Yet Phoenicia and Palestine will forever live in the memory of mankind;
      since America, as well as Europe, has received letters from the one, and
      religion from the other. <a href="#Alinknote-83" id="Alinknoteref-83" name="Alinknoteref-83">83</a> A sandy desert, alike destitute of wood and
      water, skirts along the doubtful confine of Syria, from the Euphrates to
      the Red Sea. The wandering life of the Arabs was inseparably connected
      with their independence; and wherever, on some spots less barren than the
      rest, they ventured to for many settled habitations, they soon became
      subjects to the Roman empire. <a href="#Alinknote-84" id="Alinknoteref-84" name="Alinknoteref-84">84</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-821" name="Alinknote-821">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      821 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-821">return</a>)<br/> [ This comparison is
      exaggerated, with the intention, no doubt, of attacking the authority of
      the Bible, which boasts of the fertility of Palestine. Gibbon's only
      authorities were that of Strabo (l. xvi. 1104) and the present state of
      the country. But Strabo only speaks of the neighborhood of Jerusalem,
      which he calls barren and arid to the extent of sixty stadia round the
      city: in other parts he gives a favorable testimony to the fertility of
      many parts of Palestine: thus he says, "Near Jericho there is a grove of
      palms, and a country of a hundred stadia, full of springs, and well
      peopled." Moreover, Strabo had never seen Palestine; he spoke only after
      reports, which may be as inaccurate as those according to which he has
      composed that description of Germany, in which Gluverius has detected so
      many errors. (Gluv. Germ. iii. 1.) Finally, his testimony is contradicted
      and refuted by that of other ancient authors, and by medals. Tacitus says,
      in speaking of Palestine, "The inhabitants are healthy and robust; the
      rains moderate; the soil fertile." (Hist. v. 6.) Ammianus Macellinus says
      also, "The last of the Syrias is Palestine, a country of considerable
      extent, abounding in clean and well-cultivated land, and containing some
      fine cities, none of which yields to the other; but, as it were, being on
      a parallel, are rivals."—xiv. 8. See also the historian Josephus,
      Hist. vi. 1. Procopius of Caeserea, who lived in the sixth century, says
      that Chosroes, king of Persia, had a great desire to make himself master
      of Palestine, on account of its extraordinary fertility, its opulence, and
      the great number of its inhabitants. The Saracens thought the same, and
      were afraid that Omar. when he went to Jerusalem, charmed with the
      fertility of the soil and the purity of the air, would never return to
      Medina. (Ockley, Hist. of Sarac. i. 232.) The importance attached by the
      Romans to the conquest of Palestine, and the obstacles they encountered,
      prove also the richness and population of the country. Vespasian and Titus
      caused medals to be struck with trophies, in which Palestine is
      represented by a female under a palm-tree, to signify the richness of he
      country, with this legend: Judea capta. Other medals also indicate this
      fertility; for instance, that of Herod holding a bunch of grapes, and that
      of the young Agrippa displaying fruit. As to the present state of he
      country, one perceives that it is not fair to draw any inference against
      its ancient fertility: the disasters through which it has passed, the
      government to which it is subject, the disposition of the inhabitants,
      explain sufficiently the wild and uncultivated appearance of the land,
      where, nevertheless, fertile and cultivated districts are still found,
      according to the testimony of travellers; among others, of Shaw, Maundrel,
      La Rocque, &amp;c.—G. The Abbe Guenee, in his Lettres de quelques
      Juifs a Mons. de Voltaire, has exhausted the subject of the fertility of
      Palestine; for Voltaire had likewise indulged in sarcasm on this subject.
      Gibbon was assailed on this point, not, indeed, by Mr. Davis, who, he
      slyly insinuates, was prevented by his patriotism as a Welshman from
      resenting the comparison with Wales, but by other writers. In his
      Vindication, he first established the correctness of his measurement of
      Palestine, which he estimates as 7600 square English miles, while Wales is
      about 7011. As to fertility, he proceeds in the following dexterously
      composed and splendid passage: "The emperor Frederick II., the enemy and
      the victim of the clergy, is accused of saying, after his return from his
      crusade, that the God of the Jews would have despised his promised land,
      if he had once seen the fruitful realms of Sicily and Naples." (See
      Giannone, Istor. Civ. del R. di Napoli, ii. 245.) This raillery, which
      malice has, perhaps, falsely imputed to Frederick, is inconsistent with
      truth and piety; yet it must be confessed that the soil of Palestine does
      not contain that inexhaustible, and, as it were, spontaneous principle of
      fertility, which, under the most unfavorable circumstances, has covered
      with rich harvests the banks of the Nile, the fields of Sicily, or the
      plains of Poland. The Jordan is the only navigable river of Palestine: a
      considerable part of the narrow space is occupied, or rather lost, in the
      Dead Sea whose horrid aspect inspires every sensation of disgust, and
      countenances every tale of horror. The districts which border on Arabia
      partake of the sandy quality of the adjacent desert. The face of the
      country, except the sea-coast, and the valley of the Jordan, is covered
      with mountains, which appear, for the most part, as naked and barren
      rocks; and in the neighborhood of Jerusalem, there is a real scarcity of
      the two elements of earth and water. (See Maundrel's Travels, p. 65, and
      Reland's Palestin. i. 238, 395.) These disadvantages, which now operate in
      their fullest extent, were formerly corrected by the labors of a numerous
      people, and the active protection of a wise government. The hills were
      clothed with rich beds of artificial mould, the rain was collected in vast
      cisterns, a supply of fresh water was conveyed by pipes and aqueducts to
      the dry lands. The breed of cattle was encouraged in those parts which
      were not adapted for tillage, and almost every spot was compelled to yield
      some production for the use of the inhabitants.
    </p>
<p class="foot">
      Pater ispe colendi Haud facilem esse viam voluit, primusque par artem
      Movit agros; curis acuens mortalia corda, Nec torpere gravi passus sua
      Regna veterno. Gibbon, Misc. Works, iv. 540.
    </p>
<p class="foot">
      But Gibbon has here eluded the question about the land "flowing with milk
      and honey." He is describing Judaea only, without comprehending Galilee,
      or the rich pastures beyond the Jordan, even now proverbial for their
      flocks and herds. (See Burckhardt's Travels, and Hist of Jews, i. 178.)
      The following is believed to be a fair statement: "The extraordinary
      fertility of the whole country must be taken into the account. No part was
      waste; very little was occupied by unprofitable wood; the more fertile
      hills were cultivated in artificial terraces, others were hung with
      orchards of fruit trees the more rocky and barren districts were covered
      with vineyards." Even in the present day, the wars and misgovernment of
      ages have not exhausted the natural richness of the soil. "Galilee," says
      Malte Brun, "would be a paradise were it inhabited by an industrious
      people under an enlightened government. No land could be less dependent on
      foreign importation; it bore within itself every thing that could be
      necessary for the subsistence and comfort of a simple agricultural people.
      The climate was healthy, the seasons regular; the former rains, which fell
      about October, after the vintage, prepared the ground for the seed; that
      latter, which prevailed during March and the beginning of April, made it
      grow rapidly. Directly the rains ceased, the grain ripened with still
      greater rapidity, and was gathered in before the end of May. The summer
      months were dry and very hot, but the nights cool and refreshed by copious
      dews. In September, the vintage was gathered. Grain of all kinds, wheat,
      barley, millet, zea, and other sorts, grew in abundance; the wheat
      commonly yielded thirty for one. Besides the vine and the olive, the
      almond, the date, figs of many kinds, the orange, the pomegranate, and
      many other fruit trees, flourished in the greatest luxuriance. Great
      quantity of honey was collected. The balm-tree, which produced the
      opobalsamum, a great object of trade, was probably introduced from Arabia,
      in the time of Solomon. It flourished about Jericho and in Gilead."—Milman's
      Hist. of Jews. i. 177.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-83" name="Alinknote-83">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      83 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-83">return</a>)<br/> [ The progress of religion
      is well known. The use of letter was introduced among the savages of
      Europe about fifteen hundred years before Christ; and the Europeans
      carried them to America about fifteen centuries after the Christian Aera.
      But in a period of three thousand years, the Phoenician alphabet received
      considerable alterations, as it passed through the hands of the Greeks and
      Romans.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-84" name="Alinknote-84">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      84 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-84">return</a>)<br/> [ Dion Cassius, lib.
      lxviii. p. 1131.]
    </p>
<p>
      The geographers of antiquity have frequently hesitated to what portion of
      the globe they should ascribe Egypt. <a href="#Alinknote-85" id="Alinknoteref-85" name="Alinknoteref-85">85</a> By its situation that
      celebrated kingdom is included within the immense peninsula of Africa; but
      it is accessible only on the side of Asia, whose revolutions, in almost
      every period of history, Egypt has humbly obeyed. A Roman praefect was
      seated on the splendid throne of the Ptolemies; and the iron sceptre of
      the Mamelukes is now in the hands of a Turkish pacha. The Nile flows down
      the country, above five hundred miles from the tropic of Cancer to the
      Mediterranean, and marks on either side of the extent of fertility by the
      measure of its inundations. Cyrene, situate towards the west, and along
      the sea-coast, was first a Greek colony, afterwards a province of Egypt,
      and is now lost in the desert of Barca. <a href="#Alinknote-851" id="Alinknoteref-851" name="Alinknoteref-851">851</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-85" name="Alinknote-85">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      85 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-85">return</a>)<br/> [ Ptolemy and Strabo, with
      the modern geographers, fix the Isthmus of Suez as the boundary of Asia
      and Africa. Dionysius, Mela, Pliny, Sallust, Hirtius, and Solinus, have
      preferred for that purpose the western branch of the Nile, or even the
      great Catabathmus, or descent, which last would assign to Asia, not only
      Egypt, but part of Libya.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-851" name="Alinknote-851">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      851 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-851">return</a>)<br/> [ The French editor has a
      long and unnecessary note on the History of Cyrene. For the present state
      of that coast and country, the volume of Captain Beechey is full of
      interesting details. Egypt, now an independent and improving kingdom,
      appears, under the enterprising rule of Mahommed Ali, likely to revenge
      its former oppression upon the decrepit power of the Turkish empire.—M.—This
      note was written in 1838. The future destiny of Egypt is an important
      problem, only to be solved by time. This observation will also apply to
      the new French colony in Algiers.—M. 1845.]
    </p>
<p>
      From Cyrene to the ocean, the coast of Africa extends above fifteen
      hundred miles; yet so closely is it pressed between the Mediterranean and
      the Sahara, or sandy desert, that its breadth seldom exceeds fourscore or
      a hundred miles. The eastern division was considered by the Romans as the
      more peculiar and proper province of Africa. Till the arrival of the
      Phoenician colonies, that fertile country was inhabited by the Libyans,
      the most savage of mankind. Under the immediate jurisdiction of Carthage,
      it became the centre of commerce and empire; but the republic of Carthage
      is now degenerated into the feeble and disorderly states of Tripoli and
      Tunis. The military government of Algiers oppresses the wide extent of
      Numidia, as it was once united under Massinissa and Jugurtha; but in the
      time of Augustus, the limits of Numidia were contracted; and, at least,
      two thirds of the country acquiesced in the name of Mauritania, with the
      epithet of Caesariensis. The genuine Mauritania, or country of the Moors,
      which, from the ancient city of Tingi, or Tangier, was distinguished by
      the appellation of Tingitana, is represented by the modern kingdom of Fez.
      Salle, on the Ocean, so infamous at present for its piratical
      depredations, was noticed by the Romans, as the extreme object of their
      power, and almost of their geography. A city of their foundation may still
      be discovered near Mequinez, the residence of the barbarian whom we
      condescend to style the Emperor of Morocco; but it does not appear, that
      his more southern dominions, Morocco itself, and Segelmessa, were ever
      comprehended within the Roman province. The western parts of Africa are
      intersected by the branches of Mount Atlas, a name so idly celebrated by
      the fancy of poets; <a href="#Alinknote-86" id="Alinknoteref-86" name="Alinknoteref-86">86</a> but which is now diffused over the immense
      ocean that rolls between the ancient and the new continent. <a href="#Alinknote-87" id="Alinknoteref-87" name="Alinknoteref-87">87</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-86" name="Alinknote-86">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      86 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-86">return</a>)<br/> [ The long range, moderate
      height, and gentle declivity of Mount Atlas, (see Shaw's Travels, p. 5,)
      are very unlike a solitary mountain which rears its head into the clouds,
      and seems to support the heavens. The peak of Teneriff, on the contrary,
      rises a league and a half above the surface of the sea; and, as it was
      frequently visited by the Phoenicians, might engage the notice of the
      Greek poets. See Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, tom. i. p. 312. Histoire des
      Voyages, tom. ii.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-87" name="Alinknote-87">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      87 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-87">return</a>)<br/> [ M. de Voltaire, tom. xiv.
      p. 297, unsupported by either fact or probability, has generously bestowed
      the Canary Islands on the Roman empire.]
    </p>
<p>
      Having now finished the circuit of the Roman empire, we may observe, that
      Africa is divided from Spain by a narrow strait of about twelve miles,
      through which the Atlantic flows into the Mediterranean. The columns of
      Hercules, so famous among the ancients, were two mountains which seemed to
      have been torn asunder by some convulsion of the elements; and at the foot
      of the European mountain, the fortress of Gibraltar is now seated. The
      whole extent of the Mediterranean Sea, its coasts and its islands, were
      comprised within the Roman dominion. Of the larger islands, the two
      Baleares, which derive their name of Majorca and Minorca from their
      respective size, are subject at present, the former to Spain, the latter
      to Great Britain. <a href="#Alinknote-871" id="Alinknoteref-871" name="Alinknoteref-871">871</a> It is easier to deplore the fate, than to
      describe the actual condition, of Corsica. <a href="#Alinknote-872" id="Alinknoteref-872" name="Alinknoteref-872">872</a> Two Italian sovereigns
      assume a regal title from Sardinia and Sicily. Crete, or Candia, with
      Cyprus, and most of the smaller islands of Greece and Asia, have been
      subdued by the Turkish arms, whilst the little rock of Malta defies their
      power, and has emerged, under the government of its military Order, into
      fame and opulence. <a href="#Alinknote-873" id="Alinknoteref-873" name="Alinknoteref-873">873</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-871" name="Alinknote-871">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      871 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-871">return</a>)<br/> [ Minorca was lost to
      Great Britain in 1782. Ann. Register for that year.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-872" name="Alinknote-872">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      872 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-872">return</a>)<br/> [ The gallant struggles
      of the Corsicans for their independence, under Paoli, were brought to a
      close in the year 1769. This volume was published in 1776. See Botta,
      Storia d'Italia, vol. xiv.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-873" name="Alinknote-873">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      873 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-873">return</a>)<br/> [ Malta, it need scarcely
      be said, is now in the possession of the English. We have not, however,
      thought it necessary to notice every change in the political state of the
      world, since the time of Gibbon.—M]
    </p>
<p>
      This long enumeration of provinces, whose broken fragments have formed so
      many powerful kingdoms, might almost induce us to forgive the vanity or
      ignorance of the ancients. Dazzled with the extensive sway, the
      irresistible strength, and the real or affected moderation of the
      emperors, they permitted themselves to despise, and sometimes to forget,
      the outlying countries which had been left in the enjoyment of a barbarous
      independence; and they gradually usurped the license of confounding the
      Roman monarchy with the globe of the earth. <a href="#Alinknote-88" id="Alinknoteref-88" name="Alinknoteref-88">88</a> But the temper, as well
      as knowledge, of a modern historian, require a more sober and accurate
      language. He may impress a juster image of the greatness of Rome, by
      observing that the empire was above two thousand miles in breadth, from
      the wall of Antoninus and the northern limits of Dacia, to Mount Atlas and
      the tropic of Cancer; that it extended in length more than three thousand
      miles from the Western Ocean to the Euphrates; that it was situated in the
      finest part of the Temperate Zone, between the twenty-fourth and
      fifty-sixth degrees of northern latitude; and that it was supposed to
      contain above sixteen hundred thousand square miles, for the most part of
      fertile and well-cultivated land. <a href="#Alinknote-89" id="Alinknoteref-89" name="Alinknoteref-89">89</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-88" name="Alinknote-88">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      88 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-88">return</a>)<br/> [ Bergier, Hist. des Grands
      Chemins, l. iii. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, a very useful collection.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Alinknote-89" name="Alinknote-89">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      89 (<a href="#Alinknoteref-89">return</a>)<br/> [ See Templeman's Survey of
      the Globe; but I distrust both the Doctor's learning and his maps.]
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
