<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      Chapter XXVIII: Destruction Of Paganism.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Final Destruction Of Paganism.—Introduction Of The Worship
     Of Saints, And Relics, Among The Christians.
</pre>
<p>
      The ruin of Paganism, in the age of Theodosius, is perhaps the only
      example of the total extirpation of any ancient and popular superstition;
      and may therefore deserve to be considered as a singular event in the
      history of the human mind. The Christians, more especially the clergy, had
      impatiently supported the prudent delays of Constantine, and the equal
      toleration of the elder Valentinian; nor could they deem their conquest
      perfect or secure, as long as their adversaries were permitted to exist.
      The influence which Ambrose and his brethren had acquired over the youth
      of Gratian, and the piety of Theodosius, was employed to infuse the maxims
      of persecution into the breasts of their Imperial proselytes. Two specious
      principles of religious jurisprudence were established, from whence they
      deduced a direct and rigorous conclusion, against the subjects of the
      empire who still adhered to the ceremonies of their ancestors: that the
      magistrate is, in some measure, guilty of the crimes which he neglects to
      prohibit, or to punish; and, that the idolatrous worship of fabulous
      deities, and real daemons, is the most abominable crime against the
      supreme majesty of the Creator. The laws of Moses, and the examples of
      Jewish history, <a href="#Clink28note-1" id="Clink28noteref-1" name="Clink28noteref-1">1</a> were hastily, perhaps erroneously, applied, by
      the clergy, to the mild and universal reign of Christianity. <a href="#Clink28note-2" id="Clink28noteref-2" name="Clink28noteref-2">2</a> The
      zeal of the emperors was excited to vindicate their own honor, and that of
      the Deity: and the temples of the Roman world were subverted, about sixty
      years after the conversion of Constantine.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-1" name="Clink28note-1">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-1">return</a>)<br/> [ St. Ambrose (tom. ii. de
      Obit. Theodos. p. 1208) expressly praises and recommends the zeal of
      Josiah in the destruction of idolatry The language of Julius Firmicus
      Maternus on the same subject (de Errore Profan. Relig. p. 467, edit.
      Gronov.) is piously inhuman. Nec filio jubet (the Mosaic Law) parci, nec
      fratri, et per amatam conjugera gladium vindicem ducit, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-2" name="Clink28note-2">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      2 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-2">return</a>)<br/> [ Bayle (tom. ii. p. 406,
      in his Commentaire Philosophique) justifies, and limits, these intolerant
      laws by the temporal reign of Jehovah over the Jews. The attempt is
      laudable.]
    </p>
<p>
      From the age of Numa to the reign of Gratian, the Romans preserved the
      regular succession of the several colleges of the sacerdotal order. <a href="#Clink28note-3" id="Clink28noteref-3" name="Clink28noteref-3">3</a>
      Fifteen Pontiffs exercised their supreme jurisdiction over all things, and
      persons, that were consecrated to the service of the gods; and the various
      questions which perpetually arose in a loose and traditionary system, were
      submitted to the judgment of their holy tribunal. Fifteen grave and learned
      Augurs observed the face of the heavens, and prescribed the actions of
      heroes, according to the flight of birds. Fifteen keepers of the Sibylline
      books (their name of Quindecemvirs was derived from their number)
      occasionally consulted the history of future, and, as it should seem, of
      contingent, events. Six Vestals devoted their virginity to the guard of
      the sacred fire, and of the unknown pledges of the duration of Rome; which
      no mortal had been suffered to behold with impunity. <a href="#Clink28note-4" id="Clink28noteref-4" name="Clink28noteref-4">4</a>
      Seven Epulos prepared the table of the gods, conducted the solemn
      procession, and regulated the ceremonies of the annual festival. The three
      Flamens of Jupiter, of Mars, and of Quirinus, were considered as the
      peculiar ministers of the three most powerful deities, who watched over
      the fate of Rome and of the universe. The King of the Sacrifices
      represented the person of Numa, and of his successors, in the religious
      functions, which could be performed only by royal hands. The
      confraternities of the Salians, the Lupercals, &amp;c., practised such
      rites as might extort a smile of contempt from every reasonable man, with
      a lively confidence of recommending themselves to the favor of the
      immortal gods. The authority, which the Roman priests had formerly
      obtained in the counsels of the republic, was gradually abolished by the
      establishment of monarchy, and the removal of the seat of empire. But the
      dignity of their sacred character was still protected by the laws, and
      manners of their country; and they still continued, more especially the
      college of pontiffs, to exercise in the capital, and sometimes in the
      provinces, the rights of their ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction.
      Their robes of purple, chariotz of state, and sumptuous entertainments,
      attracted the admiration of the people; and they received, from the
      consecrated lands, and the public revenue, an ample stipend, which
      liberally supported the splendor of the priesthood, and all the expenses
      of the religious worship of the state. As the service of the altar was not
      incompatible with the command of armies, the Romans, after their
      consulships and triumphs, aspired to the place of pontiff, or of augur;
      the seats of Cicero <a href="#Clink28note-5" id="Clink28noteref-5" name="Clink28noteref-5">5</a> and Pompey were filled, in the fourth century,
      by the most illustrious members of the senate; and the dignity of their
      birth reflected additional splendor on their sacerdotal character. The
      fifteen priests, who composed the college of pontiffs, enjoyed a more
      distinguished rank as the companions of their sovereign; and the Christian
      emperors condescended to accept the robe and ensigns, which were
      appropriated to the office of supreme pontiff. But when Gratian ascended
      the throne, more scrupulous or more enlightened, he sternly rejected those
      profane symbols; <a href="#Clink28note-6" id="Clink28noteref-6" name="Clink28noteref-6">6</a> applied to the service of the state, or of the
      church, the revenues of the priests and vestals; abolished their honors
      and immunities; and dissolved the ancient fabric of Roman superstition,
      which was supported by the opinions and habits of eleven hundred years.
      Paganism was still the constitutional religion of the senate. The hall, or
      temple, in which they assembled, was adorned by the statue and altar of
      Victory; <a href="#Clink28note-7" id="Clink28noteref-7" name="Clink28noteref-7">7</a> a majestic female standing on a globe, with
      flowing garments, expanded wings, and a crown of laurel in her
      outstretched hand. <a href="#Clink28note-8" id="Clink28noteref-8" name="Clink28noteref-8">8</a> The senators were sworn on the altar of the
      goddess to observe the laws of the emperor and of the empire: and a solemn
      offering of wine and incense was the ordinary prelude of their public
      deliberations. <a href="#Clink28note-9" id="Clink28noteref-9" name="Clink28noteref-9">9</a> The removal of this ancient monument was the
      only injury which Constantius had offered to the superstition of the
      Romans. The altar of Victory was again restored by Julian, tolerated by
      Valentinian, and once more banished from the senate by the zeal of
      Gratian. <a href="#Clink28note-10" id="Clink28noteref-10" name="Clink28noteref-10">10</a> But the emperor yet spared the statues of the
      gods which were exposed to the public veneration: four hundred and
      twenty-four temples, or chapels, still remained to satisfy the devotion of
      the people; and in every quarter of Rome the delicacy of the Christians
      was offended by the fumes of idolatrous sacrifice. <a href="#Clink28note-11" id="Clink28noteref-11" name="Clink28noteref-11">11</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-3" name="Clink28note-3">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-3">return</a>)<br/> [ See the outlines of the
      Roman hierarchy in Cicero, (de Legibus, ii. 7, 8,) Livy, (i. 20,)
      Dionysius Halicarnassensis, (l. ii. p. 119-129, edit. Hudson,) Beaufort,
      (Republique Romaine, tom. i. p. 1-90,) and Moyle, (vol. i. p. 10-55.) The
      last is the work of an English whig, as well as of a Roman antiquary.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-4" name="Clink28note-4">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-4">return</a>)<br/> [ These mystic, and perhaps
      imaginary, symbols have given birth to various fables and conjectures. It
      seems probable, that the Palladium was a small statue (three cubits and a
      half high) of Minerva, with a lance and distaff; that it was usually
      enclosed in a seria, or barrel; and that a similar barrel was placed by
      its side to disconcert curiosity, or sacrilege. See Mezeriac (Comment. sur
      les Epitres d'Ovide, tom i. p. 60—66) and Lipsius, (tom. iii. p. 610
      de Vesta, &amp;c. c 10.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-5" name="Clink28note-5">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-5">return</a>)<br/> [ Cicero frankly (ad
      Atticum, l. ii. Epist. 5) or indirectly (ad Familiar. l. xv. Epist. 4)
      confesses that the Augurate is the supreme object of his wishes. Pliny is
      proud to tread in the footsteps of Cicero, (l. iv. Epist. 8,) and the
      chain of tradition might be continued from history and marbles.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-6" name="Clink28note-6">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-6">return</a>)<br/> [ Zosimus, l. iv. p. 249,
      250. I have suppressed the foolish pun about Pontifex and Maximus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-7" name="Clink28note-7">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      7 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-7">return</a>)<br/> [ This statue was
      transported from Tarentum to Rome, placed in the Cœuria Julia by Caesar,
      and decorated by Augustus with the spoils of Egypt.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-8" name="Clink28note-8">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-8">return</a>)<br/> [ Prudentius (l. ii. in
      initio) has drawn a very awkward portrait of Victory; but the curious
      reader will obtain more satisfaction from Montfaucon's Antiquities, (tom.
      i. p. 341.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-9" name="Clink28note-9">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      9 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-9">return</a>)<br/> [ See Suetonius (in August.
      c. 35) and the Exordium of Pliny's Panegyric.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-10" name="Clink28note-10">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      10 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-10">return</a>)<br/> [ These facts are
      mutually allowed by the two advocates, Symmachus and Ambrose.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-11" name="Clink28note-11">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      11 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-11">return</a>)<br/> [ The Notitia Urbis, more
      recent than Constantine, does not find one Christian church worthy to be
      named among the edifices of the city. Ambrose (tom. ii. Epist. xvii. p.
      825) deplores the public scandals of Rome, which continually offended the
      eyes, the ears, and the nostrils of the faithful.]
    </p>
<p>
      But the Christians formed the least numerous party in the senate of Rome:
      <a href="#Clink28note-12" id="Clink28noteref-12" name="Clink28noteref-12">12</a>
      and it was only by their absence, that they could express their dissent
      from the legal, though profane, acts of a Pagan majority. In that
      assembly, the dying embers of freedom were, for a moment, revived and
      inflamed by the breath of fanaticism. Four respectable deputations were
      successively voted to the Imperial court, <a href="#Clink28note-13" id="Clink28noteref-13" name="Clink28noteref-13">13</a> to represent the
      grievances of the priesthood and the senate, and to solicit the
      restoration of the altar of Victory. The conduct of this important
      business was intrusted to the eloquent Symmachus, <a href="#Clink28note-14" id="Clink28noteref-14" name="Clink28noteref-14">14</a> a wealthy and noble
      senator, who united the sacred characters of pontiff and augur with the
      civil dignities of proconsul of Africa and praefect of the city. The
      breast of Symmachus was animated by the warmest zeal for the cause of
      expiring Paganism; and his religious antagonists lamented the abuse of his
      genius, and the inefficacy of his moral virtues. <a href="#Clink28note-15" id="Clink28noteref-15" name="Clink28noteref-15">15</a> The orator, whose
      petition is extant to the emperor Valentinian, was conscious of the
      difficulty and danger of the office which he had assumed. He cautiously
      avoids every topic which might appear to reflect on the religion of his
      sovereign; humbly declares, that prayers and entreaties are his only arms;
      and artfully draws his arguments from the schools of rhetoric, rather than
      from those of philosophy. Symmachus endeavors to seduce the imagination of
      a young prince, by displaying the attributes of the goddess of victory; he
      insinuates, that the confiscation of the revenues, which were consecrated
      to the service of the gods, was a measure unworthy of his liberal and
      disinterested character; and he maintains, that the Roman sacrifices would
      be deprived of their force and energy, if they were no longer celebrated
      at the expense, as well as in the name, of the republic. Even scepticism
      is made to supply an apology for superstition. The great and
      incomprehensible secret of the universe eludes the inquiry of man. Where
      reason cannot instruct, custom may be permitted to guide; and every nation
      seems to consult the dictates of prudence, by a faithful attachment to
      those rites and opinions, which have received the sanction of ages. If
      those ages have been crowned with glory and prosperity, if the devout
      people have frequently obtained the blessings which they have solicited at
      the altars of the gods, it must appear still more advisable to persist in
      the same salutary practice; and not to risk the unknown perils that may
      attend any rash innovations. The test of antiquity and success was applied
      with singular advantage to the religion of Numa; and Rome herself, the
      celestial genius that presided over the fates of the city, is introduced
      by the orator to plead her own cause before the tribunal of the emperors.
      "Most excellent princes," says the venerable matron, "fathers of your
      country! pity and respect my age, which has hitherto flowed in an
      uninterrupted course of piety. Since I do not repent, permit me to
      continue in the practice of my ancient rites. Since I am born free, allow
      me to enjoy my domestic institutions. This religion has reduced the world
      under my laws. These rites have repelled Hannibal from the city, and the
      Gauls from the Capitol. Were my gray hairs reserved for such intolerable
      disgrace? I am ignorant of the new system that I am required to adopt; but
      I am well assured, that the correction of old age is always an ungrateful
      and ignominious office." <a href="#Clink28note-16" id="Clink28noteref-16" name="Clink28noteref-16">16</a> The fears of the people supplied what the
      discretion of the orator had suppressed; and the calamities, which
      afflicted, or threatened, the declining empire, were unanimously imputed,
      by the Pagans, to the new religion of Christ and of Constantine.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-12" name="Clink28note-12">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      12 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-12">return</a>)<br/> [ Ambrose repeatedly
      affirms, in contradiction to common sense (Moyle's Works, vol. ii. p.
      147,) that the Christians had a majority in the senate.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-13" name="Clink28note-13">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      13 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-13">return</a>)<br/> [ The first (A.D. 382) to
      Gratian, who refused them audience; the second (A.D. 384) to Valentinian,
      when the field was disputed by Symmachus and Ambrose; the third (A.D. 388)
      to Theodosius; and the fourth (A.D. 392) to Valentinian. Lardner (Heathen
      Testimonies, vol. iv. p. 372-399) fairly represents the whole
      transaction.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-14" name="Clink28note-14">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      14 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-14">return</a>)<br/> [ Symmachus, who was
      invested with all the civil and sacerdotal honors, represented the emperor
      under the two characters of Pontifex Maximus, and Princeps Senatus. See
      the proud inscription at the head of his works. * Note: Mr. Beugnot has
      made it doubtful whether Symmachus was more than Pontifex Major.
      Destruction du Paganisme, vol. i. p. 459.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-15" name="Clink28note-15">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      15 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-15">return</a>)<br/> [ As if any one, says
      Prudentius (in Symmach. i. 639) should dig in the mud with an instrument
      of gold and ivory. Even saints, and polemic saints, treat this adversary
      with respect and civility.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-16" name="Clink28note-16">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      16 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-16">return</a>)<br/> [ See the fifty-fourth
      Epistle of the tenth book of Symmachus. In the form and disposition of his
      ten books of Epistles, he imitated the younger Pliny; whose rich and
      florid style he was supposed, by his friends, to equal or excel, (Macrob.
      Saturnal. l. v. c. i.) But the luxcriancy of Symmachus consists of barren
      leaves, without fruits, and even without flowers. Few facts, and few
      sentiments, can be extracted from his verbose correspondence.]
    </p>
<p>
      But the hopes of Symmachus were repeatedly baffled by the firm and
      dexterous opposition of the archbishop of Milan, who fortified the
      emperors against the fallacious eloquence of the advocate of Rome. In this
      controversy, Ambrose condescends to speak the language of a philosopher,
      and to ask, with some contempt, why it should be thought necessary to
      introduce an imaginary and invisible power, as the cause of those
      victories, which were sufficiently explained by the valor and discipline
      of the legions. He justly derides the absurd reverence for antiquity,
      which could only tend to discourage the improvements of art, and to
      replunge the human race into their original barbarism. From thence,
      gradually rising to a more lofty and theological tone, he pronounces, that
      Christianity alone is the doctrine of truth and salvation; and that every
      mode of Polytheism conducts its deluded votaries, through the paths of
      error, to the abyss of eternal perdition. <a href="#Clink28note-17" id="Clink28noteref-17" name="Clink28noteref-17">17</a> Arguments like these,
      when they were suggested by a favorite bishop, had power to prevent the
      restoration of the altar of Victory; but the same arguments fell, with
      much more energy and effect, from the mouth of a conqueror; and the gods
      of antiquity were dragged in triumph at the chariot-wheels of Theodosius.
      <a href="#Clink28note-18" id="Clink28noteref-18" name="Clink28noteref-18">18</a>
      In a full meeting of the senate, the emperor proposed, according to the
      forms of the republic, the important question, Whether the worship of
      Jupiter, or that of Christ, should be the religion of the Romans. <a href="#Clink28note-1811" id="Clink28noteref-1811" name="Clink28noteref-1811">1811</a>
      The liberty of suffrages, which he affected to allow, was destroyed by the
      hopes and fears that his presence inspired; and the arbitrary exile of
      Symmachus was a recent admonition, that it might be dangerous to oppose
      the wishes of the monarch. On a regular division of the senate, Jupiter
      was condemned and degraded by the sense of a very large majority; and it
      is rather surprising, that any members should be found bold enough to
      declare, by their speeches and votes, that they were still attached to the
      interest of an abdicated deity. <a href="#Clink28note-19" id="Clink28noteref-19" name="Clink28noteref-19">19</a> The hasty conversion
      of the senate must be attributed either to supernatural or to sordid
      motives; and many of these reluctant proselytes betrayed, on every
      favorable occasion, their secret disposition to throw aside the mask of
      odious dissimulation. But they were gradually fixed in the new religion,
      as the cause of the ancient became more hopeless; they yielded to the
      authority of the emperor, to the fashion of the times, and to the
      entreaties of their wives and children, <a href="#Clink28note-20" id="Clink28noteref-20" name="Clink28noteref-20">20</a> who were instigated
      and governed by the clergy of Rome and the monks of the East. The edifying
      example of the Anician family was soon imitated by the rest of the
      nobility: the Bassi, the Paullini, the Gracchi, embraced the Christian
      religion; and "the luminaries of the world, the venerable assembly of
      Catos (such are the high-flown expressions of Prudentius) were impatient
      to strip themselves of their pontifical garment; to cast the skin of the
      old serpent; to assume the snowy robes of baptismal innocence, and to
      humble the pride of the consular fasces before tombs of the martyrs." <a href="#Clink28note-21" id="Clink28noteref-21" name="Clink28noteref-21">21</a>
      The citizens, who subsisted by their own industry, and the populace, who
      were supported by the public liberality, filled the churches of the
      Lateran, and Vatican, with an incessant throng of devout proselytes. The
      decrees of the senate, which proscribed the worship of idols, were
      ratified by the general consent of the Romans; <a href="#Clink28note-22" id="Clink28noteref-22" name="Clink28noteref-22">22</a> the splendor of the
      Capitol was defaced, and the solitary temples were abandoned to ruin and
      contempt. <a href="#Clink28note-23" id="Clink28noteref-23" name="Clink28noteref-23">23</a> Rome submitted to the yoke of the Gospel; and
      the vanquished provinces had not yet lost their reverence for the name and
      authority of Rome. <a href="#Clink28note-2311" id="Clink28noteref-2311" name="Clink28noteref-2311">2311</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-17" name="Clink28note-17">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      17 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-17">return</a>)<br/> [ See Ambrose, (tom. ii.
      Epist. xvii. xviii. p. 825-833.) The former of these epistles is a short
      caution; the latter is a formal reply of the petition or libel of
      Symmachus. The same ideas are more copiously expressed in the poetry, if
      it may deserve that name, of Prudentius; who composed his two books
      against Symmachus (A.D. 404) while that senator was still alive. It is
      whimsical enough that Montesquieu (Considerations, &amp;c. c. xix. tom.
      iii. p. 487) should overlook the two professed antagonists of Symmachus,
      and amuse himself with descanting on the more remote and indirect
      confutations of Orosius, St. Augustin, and Salvian.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-18" name="Clink28note-18">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      18 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-18">return</a>)<br/> [ See Prudentius (in
      Symmach. l. i. 545, &amp;c.) The Christian agrees with the Pagan Zosimus
      (l. iv. p. 283) in placing this visit of Theodosius after the second civil
      war, gemini bis victor caede Tyranni, (l. i. 410.) But the time and
      circumstances are better suited to his first triumph.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-1811" name="Clink28note-1811">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1811 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-1811">return</a>)<br/> [ M. Beugnot (in his
      Histoire de la Destruction du Paganisme en Occident, i. p. 483-488)
      questions, altogether, the truth of this statement. It is very remarkable
      that Zosimus and Prudentius concur in asserting the fact of the question
      being solemnly deliberated by the senate, though with directly opposite
      results. Zosimus declares that the majority of the assembly adhered to the
      ancient religion of Rome; Gibbon has adopted the authority of Prudentius,
      who, as a Latin writer, though a poet, deserves more credit than the Greek
      historian. Both concur in placing this scene after the second triumph of
      Theodosius; but it has been almost demonstrated (and Gibbon—see the
      preceding note—seems to have acknowledged this) by Pagi and
      Tillemont, that Theodosius did not visit Rome after the defeat of
      Eugenius. M. Beugnot urges, with much force, the improbability that the
      Christian emperor would submit such a question to the senate, whose
      authority was nearly obsolete, except on one occasion, which was almost
      hailed as an epoch in the restoration of her ancient privileges. The
      silence of Ambrose and of Jerom on an event so striking, and redounding so
      much to the honor of Christianity, is of considerable weight. M. Beugnot
      would ascribe the whole scene to the poetic imagination of Prudentius; but
      I must observe, that, however Prudentius is sometimes elevated by the
      grandeur of his subject to vivid and eloquent language, this flight of
      invention would be so much bolder and more vigorous than usual with this
      poet, that I cannot but suppose there must have been some foundation for
      the story, though it may have been exaggerated by the poet, or
      misrepresented by the historian.—M]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-19" name="Clink28note-19">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      19 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-19">return</a>)<br/> [ Prudentius, after
      proving that the sense of the senate is declared by a legal majority,
      proceeds to say, (609, &amp;c.)—
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Adspice quam pleno subsellia nostra Senatu
     Decernant infame Jovis pulvinar, et omne
     Idolum longe purgata ex urbe fugandum,
     Qua vocat egregii sententia Principis, illuc
     Libera, cum pedibus, tum corde, frequentia transit.
</pre>
<p class="foot">
      Zosimus ascribes to the conscript fathers a heathenish courage, which few
      of them are found to possess.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-20" name="Clink28note-20">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      20 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-20">return</a>)<br/> [ Jerom specifies the
      pontiff Albinus, who was surrounded with such a believing family of
      children and grandchildren, as would have been sufficient to convert even
      Jupiter himself; an extraordinary proselyted (tom. i. ad Laetam, p. 54.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-21" name="Clink28note-21">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      21 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-21">return</a>)<br/> [
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Exultare Patres videas, pulcherrima mundi
     Lumina; Conciliumque senum gestire Catonum
     Candidiore toga niveum pietatis amictum
     Sumere; et exuvias deponere pontificales.
</pre>
<p class="foot">
      The fancy of Prudentius is warmed and elevated by victory]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-22" name="Clink28note-22">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      22 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-22">return</a>)<br/> [ Prudentius, after he
      has described the conversion of the senate and people, asks, with some
      truth and confidence,
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    Et dubitamus adhuc Romam, tibi, Christe, dicatam
    In leges transisse tuas?]
</pre>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-23" name="Clink28note-23">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      23 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-23">return</a>)<br/> [ Jerom exults in the
      desolation of the Capitol, and the other temples of Rome, (tom. i. p. 54,
      tom. ii. p. 95.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-2311" name="Clink28note-2311">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      2311 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-2311">return</a>)<br/> [ M. Beugnot is more
      correct in his general estimate of the measures enforced by Theodosius for
      the abolition of Paganism. He seized (according to Zosimus) the funds
      bestowed by the public for the expense of sacrifices. The public
      sacrifices ceased, not because they were positively prohibited, but
      because the public treasury would no longer bear the expense. The public
      and the private sacrifices in the provinces, which were not under the same
      regulations with those of the capital, continued to take place. In Rome
      itself, many pagan ceremonies, which were without sacrifice, remained in
      full force. The gods, therefore, were invoked, the temples were
      frequented, the pontificates inscribed, according to ancient usage, among
      the family titles of honor; and it cannot be asserted that idolatry was
      completely destroyed by Theodosius. See Beugnot, p. 491.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The filial piety of the emperors themselves engaged them to proceed, with
      some caution and tenderness, in the reformation of the eternal city. Those
      absolute monarchs acted with less regard to the prejudices of the
      provincials. The pious labor which had been suspended near twenty years
      since the death of Constantius, <a href="#Clink28note-24" id="Clink28noteref-24" name="Clink28noteref-24">24</a> was vigorously
      resumed, and finally accomplished, by the zeal of Theodosius. Whilst that
      warlike prince yet struggled with the Goths, not for the glory, but for
      the safety, of the republic, he ventured to offend a considerable party of
      his subjects, by some acts which might perhaps secure the protection of
      Heaven, but which must seem rash and unseasonable in the eye of human
      prudence. The success of his first experiments against the Pagans
      encouraged the pious emperor to reiterate and enforce his edicts of
      proscription: the same laws which had been originally published in the
      provinces of the East, were applied, after the defeat of Maximus, to the
      whole extent of the Western empire; and every victory of the orthodox
      Theodosius contributed to the triumph of the Christian and Catholic faith.
      <a href="#Clink28note-25" id="Clink28noteref-25" name="Clink28noteref-25">25</a>
      He attacked superstition in her most vital part, by prohibiting the use of
      sacrifices, which he declared to be criminal as well as infamous; and if
      the terms of his edicts more strictly condemned the impious curiosity
      which examined the entrails of the victim, <a href="#Clink28note-26" id="Clink28noteref-26" name="Clink28noteref-26">26</a> every subsequent
      explanation tended to involve in the same guilt the general practice of
      immolation, which essentially constituted the religion of the Pagans. As
      the temples had been erected for the purpose of sacrifice, it was the duty
      of a benevolent prince to remove from his subjects the dangerous
      temptation of offending against the laws which he had enacted. A special
      commission was granted to Cynegius, the Praetorian praefect of the East,
      and afterwards to the counts Jovius and Gaudentius, two officers of
      distinguished rank in the West; by which they were directed to shut the
      temples, to seize or destroy the instruments of idolatry, to abolish the
      privileges of the priests, and to confiscate the consecrated property for
      the benefit of the emperor, of the church, or of the army. <a href="#Clink28note-27" id="Clink28noteref-27" name="Clink28noteref-27">27</a>
      Here the desolation might have stopped: and the naked edifices, which were
      no longer employed in the service of idolatry, might have been protected
      from the destructive rage of fanaticism. Many of those temples were the
      most splendid and beautiful monuments of Grecian architecture; and the
      emperor himself was interested not to deface the splendor of his own
      cities, or to diminish the value of his own possessions. Those stately
      edifices might be suffered to remain, as so many lasting trophies of the
      victory of Christ. In the decline of the arts they might be usefully
      converted into magazines, manufactures, or places of public assembly: and
      perhaps, when the walls of the temple had been sufficiently purified by
      holy rites, the worship of the true Deity might be allowed to expiate the
      ancient guilt of idolatry. But as long as they subsisted, the Pagans
      fondly cherished the secret hope, that an auspicious revolution, a second
      Julian, might again restore the altars of the gods: and the earnestness
      with which they addressed their unavailing prayers to the throne, <a href="#Clink28note-28" id="Clink28noteref-28" name="Clink28noteref-28">28</a>
      increased the zeal of the Christian reformers to extirpate, without mercy,
      the root of superstition. The laws of the emperors exhibit some symptoms
      of a milder disposition: <a href="#Clink28note-29" id="Clink28noteref-29" name="Clink28noteref-29">29</a> but their cold and languid efforts were
      insufficient to stem the torrent of enthusiasm and rapine, which was
      conducted, or rather impelled, by the spiritual rulers of the church. In
      Gaul, the holy Martin, bishop of Tours, <a href="#Clink28note-30" id="Clink28noteref-30" name="Clink28noteref-30">30</a> marched at the head
      of his faithful monks to destroy the idols, the temples, and the
      consecrated trees of his extensive diocese; and, in the execution of this
      arduous task, the prudent reader will judge whether Martin was supported
      by the aid of miraculous powers, or of carnal weapons. In Syria, the
      divine and excellent Marcellus, <a href="#Clink28note-31" id="Clink28noteref-31" name="Clink28noteref-31">31</a> as he is styled by
      Theodoret, a bishop animated with apostolic fervor, resolved to level with
      the ground the stately temples within the diocese of Apamea. His attack
      was resisted by the skill and solidity with which the temple of Jupiter
      had been constructed. The building was seated on an eminence: on each of
      the four sides, the lofty roof was supported by fifteen massy columns,
      sixteen feet in circumference; and the large stone, of which they were
      composed, were firmly cemented with lead and iron. The force of the
      strongest and sharpest tools had been tried without effect. It was found
      necessary to undermine the foundations of the columns, which fell down as
      soon as the temporary wooden props had been consumed with fire; and the
      difficulties of the enterprise are described under the allegory of a black
      daemon, who retarded, though he could not defeat, the operations of the
      Christian engineers. Elated with victory, Marcellus took the field in
      person against the powers of darkness; a numerous troop of soldiers and
      gladiators marched under the episcopal banner, and he successively
      attacked the villages and country temples of the diocese of Apamea.
      Whenever any resistance or danger was apprehended, the champion of the
      faith, whose lameness would not allow him either to fight or fly, placed
      himself at a convenient distance, beyond the reach of darts. But this
      prudence was the occasion of his death: he was surprised and slain by a
      body of exasperated rustics; and the synod of the province pronounced,
      without hesitation, that the holy Marcellus had sacrificed his life in the
      cause of God. In the support of this cause, the monks, who rushed with
      tumultuous fury from the desert, distinguished themselves by their zeal
      and diligence. They deserved the enmity of the Pagans; and some of them
      might deserve the reproaches of avarice and intemperance; of avarice,
      which they gratified with holy plunder, and of intemperance, which they
      indulged at the expense of the people, who foolishly admired their
      tattered garments, loud psalmody, and artificial paleness. <a href="#Clink28note-32" id="Clink28noteref-32" name="Clink28noteref-32">32</a>
      A small number of temples was protected by the fears, the venality, the
      taste, or the prudence, of the civil and ecclesiastical governors. The
      temple of the Celestial Venus at Carthage, whose sacred precincts formed a
      circumference of two miles, was judiciously converted into a Christian
      church; <a href="#Clink28note-33" id="Clink28noteref-33" name="Clink28noteref-33">33</a> and a similar consecration has preserved
      inviolate the majestic dome of the Pantheon at Rome. <a href="#Clink28note-34" id="Clink28noteref-34" name="Clink28noteref-34">34</a>
      But in almost every province of the Roman world, an army of fanatics,
      without authority, and without discipline, invaded the peaceful
      inhabitants; and the ruin of the fairest structures of antiquity still
      displays the ravages of those Barbarians, who alone had time and
      inclination to execute such laborious destruction.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-24" name="Clink28note-24">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      24 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-24">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius (Orat. pro
      Templis, p. 10, Genev. 1634, published by James Godefroy, and now
      extremely scarce) accuses Valentinian and Valens of prohibiting
      sacrifices. Some partial order may have been issued by the Eastern
      emperor; but the idea of any general law is contradicted by the silence of
      the Code, and the evidence of ecclesiastical history. Note: See in
      Reiske's edition of Libanius, tom. ii. p. 155. Sacrific was prohibited by
      Valens, but not the offering of incense.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-25" name="Clink28note-25">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      25 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-25">return</a>)<br/> [ See his laws in the
      Theodosian Code, l. xvi. tit. x. leg. 7-11.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-26" name="Clink28note-26">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      26 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-26">return</a>)<br/> [ Homer's sacrifices are
      not accompanied with any inquisition of entrails, (see Feithius,
      Antiquitat. Homer. l. i. c. 10, 16.) The Tuscans, who produced the first
      Haruspices, subdued both the Greeks and the Romans, (Cicero de
      Divinatione, ii. 23.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-27" name="Clink28note-27">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      27 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-27">return</a>)<br/> [ Zosimus, l. iv. p. 245,
      249. Theodoret. l. v. c. 21. Idatius in Chron. Prosper. Aquitan. l. iii.
      c. 38, apud Baronium, Annal. Eccles. A.D. 389, No. 52. Libanius (pro
      Templis, p. 10) labors to prove that the commands of Theodosius were not
      direct and positive. * Note: Libanius appears to be the best authority for
      the East, where, under Theodosius, the work of devastation was carried on
      with very different degrees of violence, according to the temper of the
      local authorities and of the clergy; and more especially the neighborhood
      of the more fanatican monks. Neander well observes, that the prohibition
      of sacrifice would be easily misinterpreted into an authority for the
      destruction of the buildings in which sacrifices were performed.
      (Geschichte der Christlichen religion ii. p. 156.) An abuse of this kind
      led to this remarkable oration of Libanius. Neander, however, justly
      doubts whether this bold vindication or at least exculpation, of Paganism
      was ever delivered before, or even placed in the hands of the Christian
      emperor.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-28" name="Clink28note-28">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      28 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-28">return</a>)<br/> [ Cod. Theodos, l. xvi.
      tit. x. leg. 8, 18. There is room to believe, that this temple of Edessa,
      which Theodosius wished to save for civil uses, was soon afterwards a heap
      of ruins, (Libanius pro Templis, p. 26, 27, and Godefroy's notes, p. 59.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-29" name="Clink28note-29">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      29 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-29">return</a>)<br/> [ See this curious
      oration of Libanius pro Templis, pronounced, or rather composed, about the
      year 390. I have consulted, with advantage, Dr. Lardner's version and
      remarks, (Heathen Testimonies, vol. iv. p. 135-163.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-30" name="Clink28note-30">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      30 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-30">return</a>)<br/> [ See the Life of Martin
      by Sulpicius Severus, c. 9-14. The saint once mistook (as Don Quixote
      might have done) a harmless funeral for an idolatrous procession, and
      imprudently committed a miracle.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-31" name="Clink28note-31">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      31 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-31">return</a>)<br/> [ Compare Sozomen, (l.
      vii. c. 15) with Theodoret, (l. v. c. 21.) Between them, they relate the
      crusade and death of Marcellus.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-32" name="Clink28note-32">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      32 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-32">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius, pro Templis,
      p. 10-13. He rails at these black-garbed men, the Christian monks, who eat
      more than elephants. Poor elephants! they are temperate animals.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-33" name="Clink28note-33">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      33 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-33">return</a>)<br/> [ Prosper. Aquitan. l.
      iii. c. 38, apud Baronium; Annal. Eccles. A.D. 389, No. 58, &amp;c. The
      temple had been shut some time, and the access to it was overgrown with
      brambles.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-34" name="Clink28note-34">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      34 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-34">return</a>)<br/> [ Donatus, Roma Antiqua
      et Nova, l. iv. c. 4, p. 468. This consecration was performed by Pope
      Boniface IV. I am ignorant of the favorable circumstances which had
      preserved the Pantheon above two hundred years after the reign of
      Theodosius.]
    </p>
<p>
      In this wide and various prospect of devastation, the spectator may
      distinguish the ruins of the temple of Serapis, at Alexandria. <a href="#Clink28note-35" id="Clink28noteref-35" name="Clink28noteref-35">35</a>
      Serapis does not appear to have been one of the native gods, or monsters,
      who sprung from the fruitful soil of superstitious Egypt. <a href="#Clink28note-36" id="Clink28noteref-36" name="Clink28noteref-36">36</a>
      The first of the Ptolemies had been commanded, by a dream, to import the
      mysterious stranger from the coast of Pontus, where he had been long
      adored by the inhabitants of Sinope; but his attributes and his reign were
      so imperfectly understood, that it became a subject of dispute, whether he
      represented the bright orb of day, or the gloomy monarch of the
      subterraneous regions. <a href="#Clink28note-37" id="Clink28noteref-37" name="Clink28noteref-37">37</a> The Egyptians, who were obstinately devoted
      to the religion of their fathers, refused to admit this foreign deity
      within the walls of their cities. <a href="#Clink28note-38" id="Clink28noteref-38" name="Clink28noteref-38">38</a> But the obsequious
      priests, who were seduced by the liberality of the Ptolemies, submitted,
      without resistance, to the power of the god of Pontus: an honorable and
      domestic genealogy was provided; and this fortunate usurper was introduced
      into the throne and bed of Osiris, <a href="#Clink28note-39" id="Clink28noteref-39" name="Clink28noteref-39">39</a> the husband of Isis,
      and the celestial monarch of Egypt. Alexandria, which claimed his peculiar
      protection, gloried in the name of the city of Serapis. His temple, <a href="#Clink28note-40" id="Clink28noteref-40" name="Clink28noteref-40">40</a>
      which rivalled the pride and magnificence of the Capitol, was erected on
      the spacious summit of an artificial mount, raised one hundred steps above
      the level of the adjacent parts of the city; and the interior cavity was
      strongly supported by arches, and distributed into vaults and
      subterraneous apartments. The consecrated buildings were surrounded by a
      quadrangular portico; the stately halls, and exquisite statues, displayed
      the triumph of the arts; and the treasures of ancient learning were
      preserved in the famous Alexandrian library, which had arisen with new
      splendor from its ashes. <a href="#Clink28note-41" id="Clink28noteref-41" name="Clink28noteref-41">41</a> After the edicts of Theodosius had severely
      prohibited the sacrifices of the Pagans, they were still tolerated in the
      city and temple of Serapis; and this singular indulgence was imprudently
      ascribed to the superstitious terrors of the Christians themselves; as if
      they had feared to abolish those ancient rites, which could alone secure
      the inundations of the Nile, the harvests of Egypt, and the subsistence of
      Constantinople. <a href="#Clink28note-42" id="Clink28noteref-42" name="Clink28noteref-42">42</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-35" name="Clink28note-35">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      35 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-35">return</a>)<br/> [ Sophronius composed a
      recent and separate history, (Jerom, in Script. Eccles. tom. i. p. 303,)
      which has furnished materials to Socrates, (l. v. c. 16.) Theodoret, (l.
      v. c. 22,) and Rufinus, (l. ii. c. 22.) Yet the last, who had been at
      Alexandria before and after the event, may deserve the credit of an
      original witness.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-36" name="Clink28note-36">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      36 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-36">return</a>)<br/> [ Gerard Vossius (Opera,
      tom. v. p. 80, and de Idoloaltria, l. i. c. 29) strives to support the
      strange notion of the Fathers; that the patriarch Joseph was adored in
      Egypt, as the bull Apis, and the god Serapis. * Note: Consult du Dieu
      Serapis et son Origine, par J D. Guigniaut, (the translator of Creuzer's
      Symbolique,) Paris, 1828; and in the fifth volume of Bournouf's
      translation of Tacitus.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-37" name="Clink28note-37">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      37 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-37">return</a>)<br/> [ Origo dei nondum
      nostris celebrata. Aegyptiorum antistites sic memorant, &amp;c., Tacit.
      Hist. iv. 83. The Greeks, who had travelled into Egypt, were alike
      ignorant of this new deity.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-38" name="Clink28note-38">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      38 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-38">return</a>)<br/> [ Macrobius, Saturnal, l.
      i. c. 7. Such a living fact decisively proves his foreign extraction.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-39" name="Clink28note-39">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      39 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-39">return</a>)<br/> [ At Rome, Isis and
      Serapis were united in the same temple. The precedency which the queen
      assumed, may seem to betray her unequal alliance with the stranger of
      Pontus. But the superiority of the female sex was established in Egypt as
      a civil and religious institution, (Diodor. Sicul. tom. i. l. i. p. 31,
      edit. Wesseling,) and the same order is observed in Plutarch's Treatise of
      Isis and Osiris; whom he identifies with Serapis.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-40" name="Clink28note-40">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      40 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-40">return</a>)<br/> [ Ammianus, (xxii. 16.)
      The Expositio totius Mundi, (p. 8, in Hudson's Geograph. Minor. tom.
      iii.,) and Rufinus, (l. ii. c. 22,) celebrate the Serapeum, as one of the
      wonders of the world.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-41" name="Clink28note-41">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      41 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-41">return</a>)<br/> [ See Memoires de l'Acad.
      des Inscriptions, tom. ix. p. 397-416. The old library of the Ptolemies
      was totally consumed in Caesar's Alexandrian war. Marc Antony gave the
      whole collection of Pergamus (200,000 volumes) to Cleopatra, as the
      foundation of the new library of Alexandria.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-42" name="Clink28note-42">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      42 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-42">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius (pro Templis,
      p. 21) indiscreetly provokes his Christian masters by this insulting
      remark.]
    </p>
<p>
      At that time <a href="#Clink28note-43" id="Clink28noteref-43" name="Clink28noteref-43">43</a> the archiepiscopal throne of Alexandria was
      filled by Theophilus, <a href="#Clink28note-44" id="Clink28noteref-44" name="Clink28noteref-44">44</a> the perpetual enemy of peace and virtue; a
      bold, bad man, whose hands were alternately polluted with gold and with
      blood. His pious indignation was excited by the honors of Serapis; and the
      insults which he offered to an ancient temple of Bacchus, <a href="#Clink28note-4411" id="Clink28noteref-4411" name="Clink28noteref-4411">4411</a>
      convinced the Pagans that he meditated a more important and dangerous
      enterprise. In the tumultuous capital of Egypt, the slightest provocation
      was sufficient to inflame a civil war. The votaries of Serapis, whose
      strength and numbers were much inferior to those of their antagonists,
      rose in arms at the instigation of the philosopher Olympius, <a href="#Clink28note-45" id="Clink28noteref-45" name="Clink28noteref-45">45</a>
      who exhorted them to die in the defence of the altars of the gods. These
      Pagan fanatics fortified themselves in the temple, or rather fortress, of
      Serapis; repelled the besiegers by daring sallies, and a resolute defence;
      and, by the inhuman cruelties which they exercised on their Christian
      prisoners, obtained the last consolation of despair. The efforts of the
      prudent magistrate were usefully exerted for the establishment of a truce,
      till the answer of Theodosius should determine the fate of Serapis. The
      two parties assembled, without arms, in the principal square; and the
      Imperial rescript was publicly read. But when a sentence of destruction
      against the idols of Alexandria was pronounced, the Christians set up a
      shout of joy and exultation, whilst the unfortunate Pagans, whose fury had
      given way to consternation, retired with hasty and silent steps, and
      eluded, by their flight or obscurity, the resentment of their enemies.
      Theophilus proceeded to demolish the temple of Serapis, without any other
      difficulties, than those which he found in the weight and solidity of the
      materials: but these obstacles proved so insuperable, that he was obliged
      to leave the foundations; and to content himself with reducing the edifice
      itself to a heap of rubbish, a part of which was soon afterwards cleared
      away, to make room for a church, erected in honor of the Christian
      martyrs. The valuable library of Alexandria was pillaged or destroyed; and
      near twenty years afterwards, the appearance of the empty shelves excited
      the regret and indignation of every spectator, whose mind was not totally
      darkened by religious prejudice. <a href="#Clink28note-46" id="Clink28noteref-46" name="Clink28noteref-46">46</a> The compositions of
      ancient genius, so many of which have irretrievably perished, might surely
      have been excepted from the wreck of idolatry, for the amusement and
      instruction of succeeding ages; and either the zeal or the avarice of the
      archbishop, <a href="#Clink28note-47" id="Clink28noteref-47" name="Clink28noteref-47">47</a> might have been satiated with the rich
      spoils, which were the reward of his victory. While the images and vases
      of gold and silver were carefully melted, and those of a less valuable
      metal were contemptuously broken, and cast into the streets, Theophilus
      labored to expose the frauds and vices of the ministers of the idols;
      their dexterity in the management of the loadstone; their secret methods
      of introducing a human actor into a hollow statue; <a href="#Clink28note-4711" id="Clink28noteref-4711" name="Clink28noteref-4711">4711</a>
      and their scandalous abuse of the confidence of devout husbands and
      unsuspecting females. <a href="#Clink28note-48" id="Clink28noteref-48" name="Clink28noteref-48">48</a> Charges like these may seem to deserve some
      degree of credit, as they are not repugnant to the crafty and interested
      spirit of superstition. But the same spirit is equally prone to the base
      practice of insulting and calumniating a fallen enemy; and our belief is
      naturally checked by the reflection, that it is much less difficult to
      invent a fictitious story, than to support a practical fraud. The colossal
      statue of Serapis <a href="#Clink28note-49" id="Clink28noteref-49" name="Clink28noteref-49">49</a> was involved in the ruin of his temple and
      religion. A great number of plates of different metals, artificially
      joined together, composed the majestic figure of the deity, who touched on
      either side the walls of the sanctuary. The aspect of Serapis, his sitting
      posture, and the sceptre, which he bore in his left hand, were extremely
      similar to the ordinary representations of Jupiter. He was distinguished
      from Jupiter by the basket, or bushel, which was placed on his head; and
      by the emblematic monster which he held in his right hand; the head and
      body of a serpent branching into three tails, which were again terminated
      by the triple heads of a dog, a lion, and a wolf. It was confidently
      affirmed, that if any impious hand should dare to violate the majesty of
      the god, the heavens and the earth would instantly return to their
      original chaos. An intrepid soldier, animated by zeal, and armed with a
      weighty battle-axe, ascended the ladder; and even the Christian multitude
      expected, with some anxiety, the event of the combat. <a href="#Clink28note-50" id="Clink28noteref-50" name="Clink28noteref-50">50</a>
      He aimed a vigorous stroke against the cheek of Serapis; the cheek fell to
      the ground; the thunder was still silent, and both the heavens and the
      earth continued to preserve their accustomed order and tranquillity. The
      victorious soldier repeated his blows: the huge idol was overthrown, and
      broken in pieces; and the limbs of Serapis were ignominiously dragged
      through the streets of Alexandria. His mangled carcass was burnt in the
      Amphitheatre, amidst the shouts of the populace; and many persons
      attributed their conversion to this discovery of the impotence of their
      tutelar deity. The popular modes of religion, that propose any visible and
      material objects of worship, have the advantage of adapting and
      familiarizing themselves to the senses of mankind: but this advantage is
      counterbalanced by the various and inevitable accidents to which the faith
      of the idolater is exposed. It is scarcely possible, that, in every
      disposition of mind, he should preserve his implicit reverence for the
      idols, or the relics, which the naked eye, and the profane hand, are
      unable to distinguish from the most common productions of art or nature;
      and if, in the hour of danger, their secret and miraculous virtue does not
      operate for their own preservation, he scorns the vain apologies of his
      priests, and justly derides the object, and the folly, of his
      superstitious attachment. <a href="#Clink28note-51" id="Clink28noteref-51" name="Clink28noteref-51">51</a> After the fall of Serapis, some hopes were
      still entertained by the Pagans, that the Nile would refuse his annual
      supply to the impious masters of Egypt; and the extraordinary delay of the
      inundation seemed to announce the displeasure of the river-god. But this
      delay was soon compensated by the rapid swell of the waters. They suddenly
      rose to such an unusual height, as to comfort the discontented party with
      the pleasing expectation of a deluge; till the peaceful river again
      subsided to the well-known and fertilizing level of sixteen cubits, or
      about thirty English feet. <a href="#Clink28note-52" id="Clink28noteref-52" name="Clink28noteref-52">52</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-43" name="Clink28note-43">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      43 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-43">return</a>)<br/> [ We may choose between
      the date of Marcellinus (A.D. 389) or that of Prosper, ( A.D. 391.)
      Tillemont (Hist. des Emp. tom. v. p. 310, 756) prefers the former, and
      Pagi the latter.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-44" name="Clink28note-44">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      44 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-44">return</a>)<br/> [ Tillemont, Mem. Eccles.
      tom. xi. p. 441-500. The ambiguous situation of Theophilus—a saint,
      as the friend of Jerom a devil, as the enemy of Chrysostom—produces
      a sort of impartiality; yet, upon the whole, the balance is justly
      inclined against him.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-4411" name="Clink28note-4411">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4411 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-4411">return</a>)<br/> [ No doubt a temple
      of Osiris. St. Martin, iv 398-M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-45" name="Clink28note-45">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      45 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-45">return</a>)<br/> [ Lardner (Heathen
      Testimonies, vol. iv. p. 411) has alleged beautiful passage from Suidas,
      or rather from Damascius, which show the devout and virtuous Olympius, not
      in the light of a warrior, but of a prophet.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-46" name="Clink28note-46">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      46 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-46">return</a>)<br/> [ Nos vidimus armaria
      librorum, quibus direptis, exinanita ea a nostris hominibus, nostris
      temporibus memorant. Orosius, l. vi. c. 15, p. 421, edit. Havercamp.
      Though a bigot, and a controversial writer. Orosius seems to blush.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-47" name="Clink28note-47">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      47 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-47">return</a>)<br/> [ Eunapius, in the Lives
      of Antoninus and Aedesius, execrates the sacrilegious rapine of
      Theophilus. Tillemont (Mem. Eccles. tom. xiii. p. 453) quotes an epistle
      of Isidore of Pelusium, which reproaches the primate with the idolatrous
      worship of gold, the auri sacra fames.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-4711" name="Clink28note-4711">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4711 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-4711">return</a>)<br/> [ An English
      traveller, Mr. Wilkinson, has discovered the secret of the vocal Memnon.
      There was a cavity in which a person was concealed, and struck a stone,
      which gave a ringing sound like brass. The Arabs, who stood below when Mr.
      Wilkinson performed the miracle, described sound just as the author of the
      epigram.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-48" name="Clink28note-48">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      48 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-48">return</a>)<br/> [ Rufinus names the
      priest of Saturn, who, in the character of the god, familiarly conversed
      with many pious ladies of quality, till he betrayed himself, in a moment
      of transport, when he could not disguise the tone of his voice. The
      authentic and impartial narrative of Aeschines, (see Bayle, Dictionnaire
      Critique, Scamandre,) and the adventure of Mudus, (Joseph. Antiquitat.
      Judaic. l. xviii. c. 3, p. 877 edit. Havercamp,) may prove that such
      amorous frauds have been practised with success.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-49" name="Clink28note-49">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      49 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-49">return</a>)<br/> [ See the images of
      Serapis, in Montfaucon, (tom. ii. p. 297:) but the description of
      Macrobius (Saturnal. l. i. c. 20) is much more picturesque and
      satisfactory.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-50" name="Clink28note-50">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      50 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-50">return</a>)<br/> [
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Sed fortes tremuere manus, motique verenda
     Majestate loci, si robora sacra ferirent
     In sua credebant redituras membra secures.
</pre>
<p class="foot">
      (Lucan. iii. 429.) "Is it true," (said Augustus to a veteran of Italy, at
      whose house he supped) "that the man who gave the first blow to the golden
      statue of Anaitis, was instantly deprived of his eyes, and of his life?"—"I
      was that man, (replied the clear-sighted veteran,) and you now sup on one
      of the legs of the goddess." (Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 24)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-51" name="Clink28note-51">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      51 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-51">return</a>)<br/> [ The history of the
      reformation affords frequent examples of the sudden change from
      superstition to contempt.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-52" name="Clink28note-52">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      52 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-52">return</a>)<br/> [ Sozomen, l. vii. c. 20.
      I have supplied the measure. The same standard, of the inundation, and
      consequently of the cubit, has uniformly subsisted since the time of
      Herodotus. See Freret, in the Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom.
      xvi. p. 344-353. Greaves's Miscellaneous Works, vol. i. p. 233. The
      Egyptian cubit is about twenty-two inches of the English measure. * Note:
      Compare Wilkinson's Thebes and Egypt, p. 313.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The temples of the Roman empire were deserted, or destroyed; but the
      ingenious superstition of the Pagans still attempted to elude the laws of
      Theodosius, by which all sacrifices had been severely prohibited. The
      inhabitants of the country, whose conduct was less opposed to the eye of
      malicious curiosity, disguised their religious, under the appearance of
      convivial, meetings. On the days of solemn festivals, they assembled in
      great numbers under the spreading shade of some consecrated trees; sheep
      and oxen were slaughtered and roasted; and this rural entertainment was
      sanctified by the use of incense, and by the hymns which were sung in
      honor of the gods. But it was alleged, that, as no part of the animal was
      made a burnt-offering, as no altar was provided to receive the blood, and
      as the previous oblation of salt cakes, and the concluding ceremony of
      libations, were carefully omitted, these festal meetings did not involve
      the guests in the guilt, or penalty, of an illegal sacrifice. <a href="#Clink28note-53" id="Clink28noteref-53" name="Clink28noteref-53">53</a>
      Whatever might be the truth of the facts, or the merit of the distinction,
      <a href="#Clink28note-54" id="Clink28noteref-54" name="Clink28noteref-54">54</a>
      these vain pretences were swept away by the last edict of Theodosius,
      which inflicted a deadly wound on the superstition of the Pagans. <a href="#Clink28note-55" id="Clink28noteref-55" name="Clink28noteref-55">55</a>
<a href="#Clink28note-5511" id="Clink28noteref-5511" name="Clink28noteref-5511">5511</a> This prohibitory law is expressed in the
      most absolute and comprehensive terms. "It is our will and pleasure," says
      the emperor, "that none of our subjects, whether magistrates or private
      citizens, however exalted or however humble may be their rank and
      condition, shall presume, in any city or in any place, to worship an
      inanimate idol, by the sacrifice of a guiltless victim." The act of
      sacrificing, and the practice of divination by the entrails of the victim,
      are declared (without any regard to the object of the inquiry) a crime of
      high treason against the state, which can be expiated only by the death of
      the guilty. The rites of Pagan superstition, which might seem less bloody
      and atrocious, are abolished, as highly injurious to the truth and honor
      of religion; luminaries, garlands, frankincense, and libations of wine,
      are specially enumerated and condemned; and the harmless claims of the
      domestic genius, of the household gods, are included in this rigorous
      proscription. The use of any of these profane and illegal ceremonies,
      subjects the offender to the forfeiture of the house or estate, where they
      have been performed; and if he has artfully chosen the property of another
      for the scene of his impiety, he is compelled to discharge, without delay,
      a heavy fine of twenty-five pounds of gold, or more than one thousand
      pounds sterling. A fine, not less considerable, is imposed on the
      connivance of the secret enemies of religion, who shall neglect the duty
      of their respective stations, either to reveal, or to punish, the guilt of
      idolatry. Such was the persecuting spirit of the laws of Theodosius, which
      were repeatedly enforced by his sons and grandsons, with the loud and
      unanimous applause of the Christian world. <a href="#Clink28note-56" id="Clink28noteref-56" name="Clink28noteref-56">56</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-53" name="Clink28note-53">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      53 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-53">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius (pro Templis,
      p. 15, 16, 17) pleads their cause with gentle and insinuating rhetoric.
      From the earliest age, such feasts had enlivened the country: and those of
      Bacchus (Georgic. ii. 380) had produced the theatre of Athens. See
      Godefroy, ad loc. Liban. and Codex Theodos. tom. vi. p. 284.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-54" name="Clink28note-54">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      54 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-54">return</a>)<br/> [ Honorius tolerated
      these rustic festivals, (A.D. 399.) "Absque ullo sacrificio, atque ulla
      superstitione damnabili." But nine years afterwards he found it necessary
      to reiterate and enforce the same proviso, (Codex Theodos. l. xvi. tit. x.
      leg. 17, 19.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-55" name="Clink28note-55">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      55 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-55">return</a>)<br/> [ Cod. Theodos. l. xvi.
      tit. x. leg. 12. Jortin (Remarks on Eccles. History, vol. iv. p. 134)
      censures, with becoming asperity, the style and sentiments of this
      intolerant law.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-5511" name="Clink28note-5511">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5511 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-5511">return</a>)<br/> [ Paganism maintained
      its ground for a considerable time in the rural districts. Endelechius, a
      poet who lived at the beginning of the fifth century, speaks of the cross
      as Signum quod perhibent esse crucis Dei, Magnis qui colitur solus
      inurbibus. In the middle of the same century, Maximus, bishop of Turin,
      writes against the heathen deities as if their worship was still in full
      vigor in the neighborhood of his city. Augustine complains of the
      encouragement of the Pagan rites by heathen landowners; and Zeno of
      Verona, still later, reproves the apathy of the Christian proprietors in
      conniving at this abuse. (Compare Neander, ii. p. 169.) M. Beugnot shows
      that this was the case throughout the north and centre of Italy and in
      Sicily. But neither of these authors has adverted to one fact, which must
      have tended greatly to retard the progress of Christianity in these
      quarters. It was still chiefly a slave population which cultivated the
      soil; and however, in the towns, the better class of Christians might be
      eager to communicate "the blessed liberty of the gospel" to this class of
      mankind; however their condition could not but be silently ameliorated by
      the humanizing influence of Christianity; yet, on the whole, no doubt the
      servile class would be the least fitted to receive the gospel; and its
      general propagation among them would be embarrassed by many peculiar
      difficulties. The rural population was probably not entirely converted
      before the general establishment of the monastic institutions. Compare
      Quarterly Review of Beugnot. vol lvii. p. 52—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-56" name="Clink28note-56">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      56 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-56">return</a>)<br/> [ Such a charge should
      not be lightly made; but it may surely be justified by the authority of
      St. Augustin, who thus addresses the Donatists: "Quis nostrum, quis
      vestrum non laudat leges ab Imperatoribus datas adversus sacrificia
      Paganorum? Et certe longe ibi poera severior constituta est; illius quippe
      impietatis capitale supplicium est." Epist. xciii. No. 10, quoted by Le
      Clerc, (Bibliotheque Choisie, tom. viii. p. 277,) who adds some judicious
      reflections on the intolerance of the victorious Christians. * Note: Yet
      Augustine, with laudable inconsistency, disapproved of the forcible
      demolition of the temples. "Let us first extirpate the idolatry of the
      hearts of the heathen, and they will either themselves invite us or
      anticipate us in the execution of this good work," tom. v. p. 62. Compare
      Neander, ii. 169, and, in p. 155, a beautiful passage from Chrysostom
      against all violent means of propagating Christianity.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      In the cruel reigns of Decius and Diocletian, Christianity had been
      proscribed, as a revolt from the ancient and hereditary religion of the
      empire; and the unjust suspicions which were entertained of a dark and
      dangerous faction, were, in some measure, countenanced by the inseparable
      union and rapid conquests of the Catholic church. But the same excuses of
      fear and ignorance cannot be applied to the Christian emperors who
      violated the precepts of humanity and of the Gospel. The experience of
      ages had betrayed the weakness, as well as folly, of Paganism; the light
      of reason and of faith had already exposed, to the greatest part of
      mankind, the vanity of idols; and the declining sect, which still adhered
      to their worship, might have been permitted to enjoy, in peace and
      obscurity, the religious costumes of their ancestors. Had the Pagans been
      animated by the undaunted zeal which possessed the minds of the primitive
      believers, the triumph of the Church must have been stained with blood;
      and the martyrs of Jupiter and Apollo might have embraced the glorious
      opportunity of devoting their lives and fortunes at the foot of their
      altars. But such obstinate zeal was not congenial to the loose and
      careless temper of Polytheism. The violent and repeated strokes of the
      orthodox princes were broken by the soft and yielding substance against
      which they were directed; and the ready obedience of the Pagans protected
      them from the pains and penalties of the Theodosian Code. <a href="#Clink28note-57" id="Clink28noteref-57" name="Clink28noteref-57">57</a>
      Instead of asserting, that the authority of the gods was superior to that
      of the emperor, they desisted, with a plaintive murmur, from the use of
      those sacred rites which their sovereign had condemned. If they were
      sometimes tempted by a sally of passion, or by the hopes of concealment,
      to indulge their favorite superstition, their humble repentance disarmed
      the severity of the Christian magistrate, and they seldom refused to atone
      for their rashness, by submitting, with some secret reluctance, to the
      yoke of the Gospel. The churches were filled with the increasing multitude
      of these unworthy proselytes, who had conformed, from temporal motives, to
      the reigning religion; and whilst they devoutly imitated the postures, and
      recited the prayers, of the faithful, they satisfied their conscience by
      the silent and sincere invocation of the gods of antiquity. <a href="#Clink28note-58" id="Clink28noteref-58" name="Clink28noteref-58">58</a>
      If the Pagans wanted patience to suffer they wanted spirit to resist; and
      the scattered myriads, who deplored the ruin of the temples, yielded,
      without a contest, to the fortune of their adversaries. The disorderly
      opposition <a href="#Clink28note-59" id="Clink28noteref-59" name="Clink28noteref-59">59</a> of the peasants of Syria, and the populace of
      Alexandria, to the rage of private fanaticism, was silenced by the name
      and authority of the emperor. The Pagans of the West, without contributing
      to the elevation of Eugenius, disgraced, by their partial attachment, the
      cause and character of the usurper. The clergy vehemently exclaimed, that
      he aggravated the crime of rebellion by the guilt of apostasy; that, by
      his permission, the altar of victory was again restored; and that the
      idolatrous symbols of Jupiter and Hercules were displayed in the field,
      against the invincible standard of the cross. But the vain hopes of the
      Pagans were soon annihilated by the defeat of Eugenius; and they were left
      exposed to the resentment of the conqueror, who labored to deserve the
      favor of Heaven by the extirpation of idolatry. <a href="#Clink28note-60" id="Clink28noteref-60" name="Clink28noteref-60">60</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-57" name="Clink28note-57">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      57 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-57">return</a>)<br/> [ Orosius, l. vii. c. 28,
      p. 537. Augustin (Enarrat. in Psalm cxl apud Lardner, Heathen Testimonies,
      vol. iv. p. 458) insults their cowardice. "Quis eorum comprehensus est in
      sacrificio (cum his legibus sta prohiberentur) et non negavit?"]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-58" name="Clink28note-58">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      58 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-58">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius (pro Templis,
      p. 17, 18) mentions, without censure the occasional conformity, and as it
      were theatrical play, of these hypocrites.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-59" name="Clink28note-59">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      59 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-59">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius concludes his
      apology (p. 32) by declaring to the emperor, that unless he expressly
      warrants the destruction of the temples, the proprietors will defend
      themselves and the laws.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-60" name="Clink28note-60">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      60 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-60">return</a>)<br/> [ Paulinus, in Vit.
      Ambros. c. 26. Augustin de Civitat. Dei, l. v. c. 26. Theodoret, l. v. c.
      24.]
    </p>
<p>
      A nation of slaves is always prepared to applaud the clemency of their
      master, who, in the abuse of absolute power, does not proceed to the last
      extremes of injustice and oppression. Theodosius might undoubtedly have
      proposed to his Pagan subjects the alternative of baptism or of death; and
      the eloquent Libanius has praised the moderation of a prince, who never
      enacted, by any positive law, that all his subjects should immediately
      embrace and practise the religion of their sovereign. <a href="#Clink28note-61" id="Clink28noteref-61" name="Clink28noteref-61">61</a>
      The profession of Christianity was not made an essential qualification for
      the enjoyment of the civil rights of society, nor were any peculiar
      hardships imposed on the sectaries, who credulously received the fables of
      Ovid, and obstinately rejected the miracles of the Gospel. The palace, the
      schools, the army, and the senate, were filled with declared and devout
      Pagans; they obtained, without distinction, the civil and military honors
      of the empire. <a href="#Clink28note-6111" id="Clink28noteref-6111" name="Clink28noteref-6111">6111</a> Theodosius distinguished his liberal
      regard for virtue and genius by the consular dignity, which he bestowed on
      Symmachus; <a href="#Clink28note-62" id="Clink28noteref-62" name="Clink28noteref-62">62</a> and by the personal friendship which he
      expressed to Libanius; <a href="#Clink28note-63" id="Clink28noteref-63" name="Clink28noteref-63">63</a> and the two eloquent apologists of Paganism
      were never required either to change or to dissemble their religious
      opinions. The Pagans were indulged in the most licentious freedom of
      speech and writing; the historical and philosophic remains of Eunapius,
      Zosimus, <a href="#Clink28note-64" id="Clink28noteref-64" name="Clink28noteref-64">64</a> and the fanatic teachers of the school of
      Plato, betray the most furious animosity, and contain the sharpest
      invectives, against the sentiments and conduct of their victorious
      adversaries. If these audacious libels were publicly known, we must
      applaud the good sense of the Christian princes, who viewed, with a smile
      of contempt, the last struggles of superstition and despair. <a href="#Clink28note-65" id="Clink28noteref-65" name="Clink28noteref-65">65</a>
      But the Imperial laws, which prohibited the sacrifices and ceremonies of
      Paganism, were rigidly executed; and every hour contributed to destroy the
      influence of a religion, which was supported by custom, rather than by
      argument. The devotion or the poet, or the philosopher, may be secretly
      nourished by prayer, meditation, and study; but the exercise of public
      worship appears to be the only solid foundation of the religious
      sentiments of the people, which derive their force from imitation and
      habit. The interruption of that public exercise may consummate, in the
      period of a few years, the important work of a national revolution. The
      memory of theological opinions cannot long be preserved, without the
      artificial helps of priests, of temples, and of books. <a href="#Clink28note-66" id="Clink28noteref-66" name="Clink28noteref-66">66</a>
      The ignorant vulgar, whose minds are still agitated by the blind hopes and
      terrors of superstition, will be soon persuaded by their superiors to
      direct their vows to the reigning deities of the age; and will insensibly
      imbibe an ardent zeal for the support and propagation of the new doctrine,
      which spiritual hunger at first compelled them to accept. The generation
      that arose in the world after the promulgation of the Imperial laws, was
      attracted within the pale of the Catholic church: and so rapid, yet so
      gentle, was the fall of Paganism, that only twenty-eight years after the
      death of Theodosius, the faint and minute vestiges were no longer visible
      to the eye of the legislator. <a href="#Clink28note-67" id="Clink28noteref-67" name="Clink28noteref-67">67</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-61" name="Clink28note-61">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      61 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-61">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius suggests the
      form of a persecuting edict, which Theodosius might enact, (pro Templis,
      p. 32;) a rash joke, and a dangerous experiment. Some princes would have
      taken his advice.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-6111" name="Clink28note-6111">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6111 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-6111">return</a>)<br/> [ The most remarkable
      instance of this, at a much later period, occurs in the person of
      Merobaudes, a general and a poet, who flourished in the first half of the
      fifth century. A statue in honor of Merobaudes was placed in the Forum of
      Trajan, of which the inscription is still extant. Fragments of his poems
      have been recovered by the industry and sagacity of Niebuhr. In one
      passage, Merobaudes, in the genuine heathen spirit, attributes the ruin of
      the empire to the abolition of Paganism, and almost renews the old
      accusation of Atheism against Christianity. He impersonates some deity,
      probably Discord, who summons Bellona to take arms for the destruction of
      Rome; and in a strain of fierce irony recommends to her other fatal
      measures, to extirpate the gods of Rome:—
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Roma, ipsique tremant furialia murmura reges.
     Jam superos terris atque hospita numina pelle:
     Romanos populare Deos, et nullus in aris
     Vestoe exoratoe fotus strue palleat ignis.
     Ilis instructa dolis palatia celsa subibo;
     Majorum mores, et pectora prisca fugabo
     Funditus; atque simul, nullo discrimine rerum,
     Spernantur fortes, nec sic reverentia justis.
     Attica neglecto pereat facundia Phoebo:
     Indignis contingat honos, et pondera rerum;
     Non virtus sed casus agat; tristique cupido;
     Pectoribus saevi demens furor aestuet aevi;
     Omniaque hoec sine mente Jovis, sine numine sumimo.
</pre>
<p class="foot">
      Merobaudes in Niebuhr's edit. of the Byzantines, p. 14.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-62" name="Clink28note-62">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      62 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-62">return</a>)<br/> [ Denique pro meritis
      terrestribus aequa rependens
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Munera, sacricolis summos impertit honores.

     Dux bonus, et certare sinit cum laude suorum,
     Nec pago implicitos per debita culmina mundi Ire
     viros prohibet.
     Ipse magistratum tibi consulis, ipse tribunal

     Contulit.
     Prudent. in Symmach. i. 617, &amp;c.
</pre>
<p class="foot">
      Note: I have inserted some lines omitted by Gibbon.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-63" name="Clink28note-63">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      63 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-63">return</a>)<br/> [ Libanius (pro Templis,
      p. 32) is proud that Theodosius should thus distinguish a man, who even in
      his presence would swear by Jupiter. Yet this presence seems to be no more
      than a figure of rhetoric.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-64" name="Clink28note-64">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      64 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-64">return</a>)<br/> [ Zosimus, who styles
      himself Count and Ex-advocate of the Treasury, reviles, with partial and
      indecent bigotry, the Christian princes, and even the father of his
      sovereign. His work must have been privately circulated, since it escaped
      the invectives of the ecclesiastical historians prior to Evagrius, (l.
      iii. c. 40-42,) who lived towards the end of the sixth century. * Note:
      Heyne in his Disquisitio in Zosimum Ejusque Fidem. places Zosimum towards
      the close of the fifth century. Zosim. Heynii, p. xvii.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-65" name="Clink28note-65">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      65 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-65">return</a>)<br/> [ Yet the Pagans of
      Africa complained, that the times would not allow them to answer with
      freedom the City of God; nor does St. Augustin (v. 26) deny the charge.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-66" name="Clink28note-66">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      66 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-66">return</a>)<br/> [ The Moors of Spain, who
      secretly preserved the Mahometan religion above a century, under the
      tyranny of the Inquisition, possessed the Koran, with the peculiar use of
      the Arabic tongue. See the curious and honest story of their expulsion in
      Geddes, (Miscellanies, vol. i. p. 1-198.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-67" name="Clink28note-67">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      67 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-67">return</a>)<br/> [ Paganos qui supersunt,
      quanquam jam nullos esse credamus, &amp;c. Cod. Theodos. l. xvi. tit. x.
      leg. 22, A.D. 423. The younger Theodosius was afterwards satisfied, that
      his judgment had been somewhat premature. Note: The statement of Gibbon is
      much too strongly worded. M. Beugnot has traced the vestiges of Paganism
      in the West, after this period, in monuments and inscriptions with curious
      industry. Compare likewise note, p. 112, on the more tardy progress of
      Christianity in the rural districts.—M.]
    </p>
<p>
      The ruin of the Pagan religion is described by the sophists as a dreadful
      and amazing prodigy, which covered the earth with darkness, and restored
      the ancient dominion of chaos and of night. They relate, in solemn and
      pathetic strains, that the temples were converted into sepulchres, and
      that the holy places, which had been adorned by the statues of the gods,
      were basely polluted by the relics of Christian martyrs. "The monks" (a
      race of filthy animals, to whom Eunapius is tempted to refuse the name of
      men) "are the authors of the new worship, which, in the place of those
      deities who are conceived by the understanding, has substituted the
      meanest and most contemptible slaves. The heads, salted and pickled, of
      those infamous malefactors, who for the multitude of their crimes have
      suffered a just and ignominious death; their bodies still marked by the
      impression of the lash, and the scars of those tortures which were
      inflicted by the sentence of the magistrate; such" (continues Eunapius)
      "are the gods which the earth produces in our days; such are the martyrs,
      the supreme arbitrators of our prayers and petitions to the Deity, whose
      tombs are now consecrated as the objects of the veneration of the people."
      <a href="#Clink28note-68" id="Clink28noteref-68" name="Clink28noteref-68">68</a>
      Without approving the malice, it is natural enough to share the surprise
      of the sophist, the spectator of a revolution, which raised those obscure
      victims of the laws of Rome to the rank of celestial and invisible
      protectors of the Roman empire. The grateful respect of the Christians for
      the martyrs of the faith, was exalted, by time and victory, into religious
      adoration; and the most illustrious of the saints and prophets were
      deservedly associated to the honors of the martyrs. One hundred and fifty
      years after the glorious deaths of St. Peter and St. Paul, the Vatican and
      the Ostian road were distinguished by the tombs, or rather by the
      trophies, of those spiritual heroes. <a href="#Clink28note-69" id="Clink28noteref-69" name="Clink28noteref-69">69</a> In the age which
      followed the conversion of Constantine, the emperors, the consuls, and the
      generals of armies, devoutly visited the sepulchres of a tentmaker and a
      fisherman; <a href="#Clink28note-70" id="Clink28noteref-70" name="Clink28noteref-70">70</a> and their venerable bones were deposited
      under the altars of Christ, on which the bishops of the royal city
      continually offered the unbloody sacrifice. <a href="#Clink28note-71" id="Clink28noteref-71" name="Clink28noteref-71">71</a> The new capital of
      the Eastern world, unable to produce any ancient and domestic trophies,
      was enriched by the spoils of dependent provinces. The bodies of St.
      Andrew, St. Luke, and St. Timothy, had reposed near three hundred years in
      the obscure graves, from whence they were transported, in solemn pomp, to
      the church of the apostles, which the magnificence of Constantine had
      founded on the banks of the Thracian Bosphorus. <a href="#Clink28note-72" id="Clink28noteref-72" name="Clink28noteref-72">72</a> About fifty years
      afterwards, the same banks were honored by the presence of Samuel, the
      judge and prophet of the people of Israel. His ashes, deposited in a
      golden vase, and covered with a silken veil, were delivered by the bishops
      into each other's hands. The relics of Samuel were received by the people
      with the same joy and reverence which they would have shown to the living
      prophet; the highways, from Palestine to the gates of Constantinople, were
      filled with an uninterrupted procession; and the emperor Arcadius himself,
      at the head of the most illustrious members of the clergy and senate,
      advanced to meet his extraordinary guest, who had always deserved and
      claimed the homage of kings. <a href="#Clink28note-73" id="Clink28noteref-73" name="Clink28noteref-73">73</a> The example of Rome
      and Constantinople confirmed the faith and discipline of the Catholic
      world. The honors of the saints and martyrs, after a feeble and
      ineffectual murmur of profane reason, <a href="#Clink28note-74" id="Clink28noteref-74" name="Clink28noteref-74">74</a> were universally
      established; and in the age of Ambrose and Jerom, something was still
      deemed wanting to the sanctity of a Christian church, till it had been
      consecrated by some portion of holy relics, which fixed and inflamed the
      devotion of the faithful.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-68" name="Clink28note-68">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      68 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-68">return</a>)<br/> [ See Eunapius, in the
      Life of the sophist Aedesius; in that of Eustathius he foretells the ruin
      of Paganism.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-69" name="Clink28note-69">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      69 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-69">return</a>)<br/> [ Caius, (apud Euseb.
      Hist. Eccles. l. ii. c. 25,) a Roman presbyter, who lived in the time of
      Zephyrinus, (A.D. 202-219,) is an early witness of this superstitious
      practice.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-70" name="Clink28note-70">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      70 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-70">return</a>)<br/> [ Chrysostom. Quod
      Christus sit Deus. Tom. i. nov. edit. No. 9. I am indebted for this
      quotation to Benedict the XIVth's pastoral letter on the Jubilee of the
      year 1759. See the curious and entertaining letters of M. Chais, tom.
      iii.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-71" name="Clink28note-71">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      71 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-71">return</a>)<br/> [ Male facit ergo Romanus
      episcopus? qui, super mortuorum hominum, Petri &amp; Pauli, secundum nos,
      ossa veneranda ... offeri Domino sacrificia, et tumulos eorum, Christi
      arbitratur altaria. Jerom. tom. ii. advers. Vigilant. p. 183.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-72" name="Clink28note-72">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      72 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-72">return</a>)<br/> [ Jerom (tom. ii. p. 122)
      bears witness to these translations, which are neglected by the
      ecclesiastical historians. The passion of St. Andrew at Patrae is
      described in an epistle from the clergy of Achaia, which Baronius (Annal.
      Eccles. A.D. 60, No. 34) wishes to believe, and Tillemont is forced to
      reject. St. Andrew was adopted as the spiritual founder of Constantinople,
      (Mem. Eccles. tom. i. p. 317-323, 588-594.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-73" name="Clink28note-73">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      73 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-73">return</a>)<br/> [ Jerom (tom. ii. p. 122)
      pompously describes the translation of Samuel, which is noticed in all the
      chronicles of the times.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-74" name="Clink28note-74">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      74 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-74">return</a>)<br/> [ The presbyter
      Vigilantius, the Protestant of his age, firmly, though ineffectually,
      withstood the superstition of monks, relics, saints, fasts, &amp;c., for
      which Jerom compares him to the Hydra, Cerberus, the Centaurs, &amp;c.,
      and considers him only as the organ of the Daemon, (tom. ii. p. 120-126.)
      Whoever will peruse the controversy of St. Jerom and Vigilantius, and St.
      Augustin's account of the miracles of St. Stephen, may speedily gain some
      idea of the spirit of the Fathers.]
    </p>
<p>
      In the long period of twelve hundred years, which elapsed between the
      reign of Constantine and the reformation of Luther, the worship of saints
      and relics corrupted the pure and perfect simplicity of the Christian
      model: and some symptoms of degeneracy may be observed even in the first
      generations which adopted and cherished this pernicious innovation.
    </p>
<p>
      I. The satisfactory experience, that the relics of saints were more
      valuable than gold or precious stones, <a href="#Clink28note-75" id="Clink28noteref-75" name="Clink28noteref-75">75</a> stimulated the clergy
      to multiply the treasures of the church. Without much regard for truth or
      probability, they invented names for skeletons, and actions for names. The
      fame of the apostles, and of the holy men who had imitated their virtues,
      was darkened by religious fiction. To the invincible band of genuine and
      primitive martyrs, they added myriads of imaginary heroes, who had never
      existed, except in the fancy of crafty or credulous legendaries; and there
      is reason to suspect, that Tours might not be the only diocese in which
      the bones of a malefactor were adored, instead of those of a saint. <a href="#Clink28note-76" id="Clink28noteref-76" name="Clink28noteref-76">76</a>
      A superstitious practice, which tended to increase the temptations of
      fraud, and credulity, insensibly extinguished the light of history, and of
      reason, in the Christian world.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-75" name="Clink28note-75">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      75 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-75">return</a>)<br/> [ M. de Beausobre (Hist.
      du Manicheisme, tom. ii. p. 648) has applied a worldly sense to the pious
      observation of the clergy of Smyrna, who carefully preserved the relics of
      St. Polycarp the martyr.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-76" name="Clink28note-76">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      76 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-76">return</a>)<br/> [ Martin of Tours (see
      his Life, c. 8, by Sulpicius Severus) extorted this confession from the
      mouth of the dead man. The error is allowed to be natural; the discovery
      is supposed to be miraculous. Which of the two was likely to happen most
      frequently?]
    </p>
<p>
      II. But the progress of superstition would have been much less rapid and
      victorious, if the faith of the people had not been assisted by the
      seasonable aid of visions and miracles, to ascertain the authenticity and
      virtue of the most suspicious relics. In the reign of the younger
      Theodosius, Lucian, <a href="#Clink28note-77" id="Clink28noteref-77" name="Clink28noteref-77">77</a> a presbyter of Jerusalem, and the
      ecclesiastical minister of the village of Caphargamala, about twenty miles
      from the city, related a very singular dream, which, to remove his doubts,
      had been repeated on three successive Saturdays. A venerable figure stood
      before him, in the silence of the night, with a long beard, a white robe,
      and a gold rod; announced himself by the name of Gamaliel, and revealed to
      the astonished presbyter, that his own corpse, with the bodies of his son
      Abibas, his friend Nicodemus, and the illustrious Stephen, the first
      martyr of the Christian faith, were secretly buried in the adjacent field.
      He added, with some impatience, that it was time to release himself and
      his companions from their obscure prison; that their appearance would be
      salutary to a distressed world; and that they had made choice of Lucian to
      inform the bishop of Jerusalem of their situation and their wishes. The
      doubts and difficulties which still retarded this important discovery were
      successively removed by new visions; and the ground was opened by the
      bishop, in the presence of an innumerable multitude. The coffins of
      Gamaliel, of his son, and of his friend, were found in regular order; but
      when the fourth coffin, which contained the remains of Stephen, was shown
      to the light, the earth trembled, and an odor, such as that of paradise,
      was smelt, which instantly cured the various diseases of seventy-three of
      the assistants. The companions of Stephen were left in their peaceful
      residence of Caphargamala: but the relics of the first martyr were
      transported, in solemn procession, to a church constructed in their honor
      on Mount Sion; and the minute particles of those relics, a drop of blood,
      <a href="#Clink28note-78" id="Clink28noteref-78" name="Clink28noteref-78">78</a>
      or the scrapings of a bone, were acknowledged, in almost every province of
      the Roman world, to possess a divine and miraculous virtue. The grave and
      learned Augustin, <a href="#Clink28note-79" id="Clink28noteref-79" name="Clink28noteref-79">79</a> whose understanding scarcely admits the
      excuse of credulity, has attested the innumerable prodigies which were
      performed in Africa by the relics of St. Stephen; and this marvellous
      narrative is inserted in the elaborate work of the City of God, which the
      bishop of Hippo designed as a solid and immortal proof of the truth of
      Christianity. Augustin solemnly declares, that he has selected those
      miracles only which were publicly certified by the persons who were either
      the objects, or the spectators, of the power of the martyr. Many prodigies
      were omitted, or forgotten; and Hippo had been less favorably treated than
      the other cities of the province. And yet the bishop enumerates above
      seventy miracles, of which three were resurrections from the dead, in the
      space of two years, and within the limits of his own diocese. <a href="#Clink28note-80" id="Clink28noteref-80" name="Clink28noteref-80">80</a>
      If we enlarge our view to all the dioceses, and all the saints, of the
      Christian world, it will not be easy to calculate the fables, and the
      errors, which issued from this inexhaustible source. But we may surely be
      allowed to observe, that a miracle, in that age of superstition and
      credulity, lost its name and its merit, since it could scarcely be
      considered as a deviation from the ordinary and established laws of
      nature.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-77" name="Clink28note-77">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      77 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-77">return</a>)<br/> [ Lucian composed in
      Greek his original narrative, which has been translated by Avitus, and
      published by Baronius, (Annal. Eccles. A.D. 415, No. 7-16.) The
      Benedictine editors of St. Augustin have given (at the end of the work de
      Civitate Dei) two several copies, with many various readings. It is the
      character of falsehood to be loose and inconsistent. The most incredible
      parts of the legend are smoothed and softened by Tillemont, (Mem. Eccles.
      tom. ii. p. 9, &amp;c.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-78" name="Clink28note-78">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      78 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-78">return</a>)<br/> [ A phial of St.
      Stephen's blood was annually liquefied at Naples, till he was superseded
      by St. Jamarius, (Ruinart. Hist. Persecut. Vandal p. 529.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-79" name="Clink28note-79">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      79 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-79">return</a>)<br/> [ Augustin composed the
      two-and-twenty books de Civitate Dei in the space of thirteen years, A.D.
      413-426. Tillemont, (Mem. Eccles. tom. xiv. p. 608, &amp;c.) His learning
      is too often borrowed, and his arguments are too often his own; but the
      whole work claims the merit of a magnificent design, vigorously, and not
      unskilfully, executed.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-80" name="Clink28note-80">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      80 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-80">return</a>)<br/> [ See Augustin de
      Civitat. Dei, l. xxii. c. 22, and the Appendix, which contains two books
      of St. Stephen's miracles, by Evodius, bishop of Uzalis. Freculphus (apud
      Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, tom. vii. p. 249) has preserved a Gallic or a
      Spanish proverb, "Whoever pretends to have read all the miracles of St.
      Stephen, he lies."]
    </p>
<p>
      III. The innumerable miracles, of which the tombs of the martyrs were the
      perpetual theatre, revealed to the pious believer the actual state and
      constitution of the invisible world; and his religious speculations
      appeared to be founded on the firm basis of fact and experience. Whatever
      might be the condition of vulgar souls, in the long interval between the
      dissolution and the resurrection of their bodies, it was evident that the
      superior spirits of the saints and martyrs did not consume that portion of
      their existence in silent and inglorious sleep. <a href="#Clink28note-81" id="Clink28noteref-81" name="Clink28noteref-81">81</a> It was evident
      (without presuming to determine the place of their habitation, or the
      nature of their felicity) that they enjoyed the lively and active
      consciousness of their happiness, their virtue, and their powers; and that
      they had already secured the possession of their eternal reward. The
      enlargement of their intellectual faculties surpassed the measure of the
      human imagination; since it was proved by experience, that they were
      capable of hearing and understanding the various petitions of their
      numerous votaries; who, in the same moment of time, but in the most
      distant parts of the world, invoked the name and assistance of Stephen or
      of Martin. <a href="#Clink28note-82" id="Clink28noteref-82" name="Clink28noteref-82">82</a> The confidence of their petitioners was
      founded on the persuasion, that the saints, who reigned with Christ, cast
      an eye of pity upon earth; that they were warmly interested in the
      prosperity of the Catholic Church; and that the individuals, who imitated
      the example of their faith and piety, were the peculiar and favorite
      objects of their most tender regard. Sometimes, indeed, their friendship
      might be influenced by considerations of a less exalted kind: they viewed
      with partial affection the places which had been consecrated by their
      birth, their residence, their death, their burial, or the possession of
      their relics. The meaner passions of pride, avarice, and revenge, may be
      deemed unworthy of a celestial breast; yet the saints themselves
      condescended to testify their grateful approbation of the liberality of
      their votaries; and the sharpest bolts of punishment were hurled against
      those impious wretches, who violated their magnificent shrines, or
      disbelieved their supernatural power. <a href="#Clink28note-83" id="Clink28noteref-83" name="Clink28noteref-83">83</a> Atrocious, indeed,
      must have been the guilt, and strange would have been the scepticism, of
      those men, if they had obstinately resisted the proofs of a divine agency,
      which the elements, the whole range of the animal creation, and even the
      subtle and invisible operations of the human mind, were compelled to obey.
      <a href="#Clink28note-84" id="Clink28noteref-84" name="Clink28noteref-84">84</a>
      The immediate, and almost instantaneous, effects that were supposed to
      follow the prayer, or the offence, satisfied the Christians of the ample
      measure of favor and authority which the saints enjoyed in the presence of
      the Supreme God; and it seemed almost superfluous to inquire whether they
      were continually obliged to intercede before the throne of grace; or
      whether they might not be permitted to exercise, according to the dictates
      of their benevolence and justice, the delegated powers of their
      subordinate ministry. The imagination, which had been raised by a painful
      effort to the contemplation and worship of the Universal Cause, eagerly
      embraced such inferior objects of adoration as were more proportioned to
      its gross conceptions and imperfect faculties. The sublime and simple
      theology of the primitive Christians was gradually corrupted; and the
      Monarchy of heaven, already clouded by metaphysical subtleties, was
      degraded by the introduction of a popular mythology, which tended to
      restore the reign of polytheism. <a href="#Clink28note-85" id="Clink28noteref-85" name="Clink28noteref-85">85</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-81" name="Clink28note-81">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      81 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-81">return</a>)<br/> [ Burnet (de Statu
      Mortuorum, p. 56-84) collects the opinions of the Fathers, as far as they
      assert the sleep, or repose, of human souls till the day of judgment. He
      afterwards exposes (p. 91, &amp;c.) the inconveniences which must arise,
      if they possessed a more active and sensible existence.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-82" name="Clink28note-82">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      82 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-82">return</a>)<br/> [ Vigilantius placed the
      souls of the prophets and martyrs, either in the bosom of Abraham, (in
      loco refrigerii,) or else under the altar of God. Nec posse suis tumulis
      et ubi voluerunt adesse praesentes. But Jerom (tom. ii. p. 122) sternly
      refutes this blasphemy. Tu Deo leges pones? Tu apostolis vincula injicies,
      ut usque ad diem judicii teneantur custodia, nec sint cum Domino suo; de
      quibus scriptum est, Sequuntur Agnum quocunque vadit. Si Agnus ubique,
      ergo, et hi, qui cum Agno sunt, ubique esse credendi sunt. Et cum diabolus
      et daemones tote vagentur in orbe, &amp;c.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-83" name="Clink28note-83">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      83 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-83">return</a>)<br/> [ Fleury Discours sur
      l'Hist. Ecclesiastique, iii p. 80.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-84" name="Clink28note-84">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      84 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-84">return</a>)<br/> [ At Minorca, the relics
      of St. Stephen converted, in eight days, 540 Jews; with the help, indeed,
      of some wholesome severities, such as burning the synagogue, driving the
      obstinate infidels to starve among the rocks, &amp;c. See the original
      letter of Severus, bishop of Minorca (ad calcem St. Augustin. de Civ.
      Dei,) and the judicious remarks of Basnage, (tom. viii. p. 245-251.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-85" name="Clink28note-85">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      85 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-85">return</a>)<br/> [ Mr. Hume (Essays, vol.
      ii. p. 434) observes, like a philosopher, the natural flux and reflux of
      polytheism and theism.]
    </p>
<p>
      IV. As the objects of religion were gradually reduced to the standard of
      the imagination, the rites and ceremonies were introduced that seemed most
      powerfully to affect the senses of the vulgar. If, in the beginning of the
      fifth century, <a href="#Clink28note-86" id="Clink28noteref-86" name="Clink28noteref-86">86</a> Tertullian, or Lactantius, <a href="#Clink28note-87" id="Clink28noteref-87" name="Clink28noteref-87">87</a>
      had been suddenly raised from the dead, to assist at the festival of some
      popular saint, or martyr, <a href="#Clink28note-88" id="Clink28noteref-88" name="Clink28noteref-88">88</a> they would have gazed with astonishment, and
      indignation, on the profane spectacle, which had succeeded to the pure and
      spiritual worship of a Christian congregation. As soon as the doors of the
      church were thrown open, they must have been offended by the smoke of
      incense, the perfume of flowers, and the glare of lamps and tapers, which
      diffused, at noonday, a gaudy, superfluous, and, in their opinion, a
      sacrilegious light. If they approached the balustrade of the altar, they
      made their way through the prostrate crowd, consisting, for the most part,
      of strangers and pilgrims, who resorted to the city on the vigil of the
      feast; and who already felt the strong intoxication of fanaticism, and,
      perhaps, of wine. Their devout kisses were imprinted on the walls and
      pavement of the sacred edifice; and their fervent prayers were directed,
      whatever might be the language of their church, to the bones, the blood,
      or the ashes of the saint, which were usually concealed, by a linen or
      silken veil, from the eyes of the vulgar. The Christians frequented the
      tombs of the martyrs, in the hope of obtaining, from their powerful
      intercession, every sort of spiritual, but more especially of temporal,
      blessings. They implored the preservation of their health, or the cure of
      their infirmities; the fruitfulness of their barren wives, or the safety
      and happiness of their children. Whenever they undertook any distant or
      dangerous journey, they requested, that the holy martyrs would be their
      guides and protectors on the road; and if they returned without having
      experienced any misfortune, they again hastened to the tombs of the
      martyrs, to celebrate, with grateful thanksgivings, their obligations to
      the memory and relics of those heavenly patrons. The walls were hung round
      with symbols of the favors which they had received; eyes, and hands, and
      feet, of gold and silver: and edifying pictures, which could not long
      escape the abuse of indiscreet or idolatrous devotion, represented the
      image, the attributes, and the miracles of the tutelar saint. The same
      uniform original spirit of superstition might suggest, in the most distant
      ages and countries, the same methods of deceiving the credulity, and of
      affecting the senses of mankind: <a href="#Clink28note-89" id="Clink28noteref-89" name="Clink28noteref-89">89</a> but it must
      ingenuously be confessed, that the ministers of the Catholic church
      imitated the profane model, which they were impatient to destroy. The most
      respectable bishops had persuaded themselves that the ignorant rustics
      would more cheerfully renounce the superstitions of Paganism, if they
      found some resemblance, some compensation, in the bosom of Christianity.
      The religion of Constantine achieved, in less than a century, the final
      conquest of the Roman empire: but the victors themselves were insensibly
      subdued by the arts of their vanquished rivals. <a href="#Clink28note-90" id="Clink28noteref-90" name="Clink28noteref-90">90</a> <a href="#Clink28note-9011" id="Clink28noteref-9011" name="Clink28noteref-9011">9011</a>
</p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-86" name="Clink28note-86">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      86 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-86">return</a>)<br/> [ D'Aubigne (see his own
      Memoires, p. 156-160) frankly offered, with the consent of the Huguenot
      ministers, to allow the first 400 years as the rule of faith. The Cardinal
      du Perron haggled for forty years more, which were indiscreetly given. Yet
      neither party would have found their account in this foolish bargain.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-87" name="Clink28note-87">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      87 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-87">return</a>)<br/> [ The worship practised
      and inculcated by Tertullian, Lactantius Arnobius, &amp;c., is so
      extremely pure and spiritual, that their declamations against the Pagan
      sometimes glance against the Jewish, ceremonies.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-88" name="Clink28note-88">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      88 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-88">return</a>)<br/> [ Faustus the Manichaean
      accuses the Catholics of idolatry. Vertitis idola in martyres.... quos
      votis similibus colitis. M. de Beausobre, (Hist. Critique du Manicheisme,
      tom. ii. p. 629-700,) a Protestant, but a philosopher, has represented,
      with candor and learning, the introduction of Christian idolatry in the
      fourth and fifth centuries.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-89" name="Clink28note-89">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      89 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-89">return</a>)<br/> [ The resemblance of
      superstition, which could not be imitated, might be traced from Japan to
      Mexico. Warburton has seized this idea, which he distorts, by rendering it
      too general and absolute, (Divine Legation, vol. iv. p. 126, &amp;c.)]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-90" name="Clink28note-90">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      90 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-90">return</a>)<br/> [ The imitation of
      Paganism is the subject of Dr. Middleton's agreeable letter from Rome.
      Warburton's animadversions obliged him to connect (vol. iii. p. 120-132,)
      the history of the two religions, and to prove the antiquity of the
      Christian copy.]
    </p>
<p>
<a id="Clink28note-9011" name="Clink28note-9011">
<!-- Note --></a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      9011 (<a href="#Clink28noteref-9011">return</a>)<br/> [ But there was
      always this important difference between Christian and heathen Polytheism.
      In Paganism this was the whole religion; in the darkest ages of
      Christianity, some, however obscure and vague, Christian notions of future
      retribution, of the life after death, lurked at the bottom, and operated,
      to a certain extent, on the thoughts and feelings, sometimes on the
      actions.—M.]
    </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
